One year of demonetisation: How much note ban has changed India
To break the grip of corruption and black money, we have decided that the 500 rupee and 1,000 rupee currency notes presently in use will no longer be legal tender from midnight tonight, that is, 8th November 2016." With these words, Prime Minister Narendra Modi had announced demonetisation a year ago that took everyone by surprise. One year down the line, the jury is still out on the success of the Narendra Modi government's decision to discontinue about 15.4 lakh crore of currencies in denominations of Rs 500 and Rs 1000. The objectives of demonetisation, as defined by government in various phases, were to crack a whip against black money, fight counterfeit currency in circulation, formalisation of cash-dependent businesses, bringing back money lying idle in the banking system and hitting hard at the financial backbone of terrorism and naxalism. HOW MONEY FOUND WAY TO BANKS? According to Union Finance Minister Arun Jaitley's statement in Parliament, Rs 4.9 lakh crore was deposited in about 1.48 lakh bank accounts post-demonetisation. These were high value deposits of over Rs 80 lakh each. The average deposit size was over Rs 3.3 crore for all 1.48 lakh bank accounts. Smaller deposits, ranging Rs 2 lakh to Rs 80 lakh, were made in about 1.09 crore bank accounts after demonetisation was announced. The average deposit size in these accounts was Rs 5 lakh. According to one estimate the total deposits made after demonetisation accounted for more than Rs 10 lakh or simply about two-thirds of the total demonetised money. In August, the Reserve Bank of India declared in its annual report, that of demonetised currencies worth Rs 15.4 lakh crore, the high value notes worth Rs 15.3 lakh crore were deposited in the banks. This means, about 99 per cent of the demonetised currency came back to the banking system by June 30. Several critics raised questions about the success of demonetisation saying that coming back of almost entire invalidated currency stock into the banking system meant, the government could not find any black with the note ban. However, the real import of the figures could be gauged only after the taxmen have done their job by establishing money trail. ACTION AGAINST BLACK MONEY The government has projected demonetisation is a big ongoing success story in fight against black money. Addressing a rally in Himachal Pradesh yesterday, PM Narendra Modi yesterday said, "Rs 4,000 crore fraud found in probe into 5,000 companies out of 3 lakh that have shut down after demonetisation." The Ministry of Corporate Affairs in a release said, "Preliminary enquiry on the basis of information received from 56 banks in respect of 35,000 companies involving 58,000 accounts has revealed that an amount of over Rs 17,000 crore was deposited and withdrawn post demonetisation." In one case, a company which had a negative opening balance on November 8, 2016, deposited and withdrew Rs 2,484 crore post-demonetisation. "Based on the massive drive undertaken by Ministry of Corporate Affairs around 2.24 lakh companies have been struck off till date for remaining inactive for a period of two years or more," the statement read. Earlier, the government said that 1.63 lakh companies were shut down across the country on the basis of data mined after demonetisation. Of these, nearly 38,000 were found to be shell companies - firms in existence not for business but financial deception. Assuming that government's that most black money has been detected after demonetisation, economist Surjit Bhalla estimated that the move would yield Rs 2.5 lakh crore additional revenue in the first year while Rs 1.5 lakh crore additional earning will accrue to the central coffer every year in perpetuity. TACKLING COUNTERFEIT CURRENCY As per the records available in public domain till date, demonetisation does not seem to have been a blow to fake currency business. According to the National Investigation Agency, counterfeit currencies worth only Rs 400 crore were in circulation in 2015. This was found to be about 0.028 per cent of the total currency in circulation. Earlier this year, a report suggested that of all the returned Rs 1000 notes, only 0.0007 per cent was found to be counterfeit. Of the all the returned Rs 500 notes, 0.002 per cent was counterfeit. The total value of the fake currency notes identified by the banks of the returned demonetised currency is Rs 41 crore. The critics argue that either the banks failed to distinguish counterfeit currencies from the genuine ones on mass scale or the counterfeit currency did not exist in the measure expected by the government. DIGITAL PUSH BY DEMONETISATION Among other things, demonetisation brought digital cash payment awareness in the country. According to the Payments Council of India, the growth rate of the digital payments industry accelerated post-demonetisation by 40-70 per cent. It was earlier in the range of 20-50 per cent. The spike in digital transactions was evident soon after demonetisation but it saw decline in the subsequent months with remonetisation eased currency shortage. In November last year, there were 671.49 million digital transactions which increased to 957.50 million in December. But, by July it had come down to 862.38 million digital payments. In terms of value of digital transactions, November 2016 saw digital payments worth Rs 94 lakh crore. They rose to Rs 149 lakh crore in March. The corresponding figure for July was Rs 107 lakh crore. As per records, digital money transfer through Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) and National Electronic Funds Transfer (NEFT) grew by 6 per cent in terms of number and by 20 per cent in value of transactions this year in comparison 2016-17. FISCAL GROWTH AND INSURGENCIES In the first fiscal quarter after demonetisation was announced, the GDP growth rate fell to 6.1 per cent compared to 7.9 for the same period the previous year. The GDP growth rate further slipped to 5.7 for April-June quarter compared to 7.1 for the corresponding period last year. But, it is not clear yet, if the decline in GDP growth rate was due to demonetisation or a continuation of the trend after the last quarter of 2015-16. Further, pre-GST uncertainty is said to have played a major role in production sluggishness in April-June period this fiscal. Expectations are that the GDP figures for June-September would show a revival trend. Another argument for demonetisation was to break the backbone of terrorism and naxalism. However, there is not adequate proof to back the claim. Incidents of terrorism have seen spurt in Kashmir Valley where the casualties on both sides have gone up sharply. Maoist insurgency has shown decline. But, activists working in the affected regions have credited the law enforcing and counter-insurgency agencies for what is perceived as a dull phase in naxal insurgency in eastern states. Demonetisation came as a major disruption that, many economists believed, was necessary for the Indian economy before it could be projected to the next level. Demonetisation further got integrated with the Goods and Services Tax (GST) rollout. The government expects that the twin measures would pay rich dividends in terms of revenue to carry out its social welfare and development programmes while cracking down on black money.