run:
20
Input set size 20

 Link Clustering for tables summaries...
cluster 1
    Sentence 1 : 2016 Indian banknote demonetisation Early political career Premiership On 8 November 2016, the Government of India announced the demonetisation of all ?500 and ?1000 banknotes of the Mahatma Gandhi Series. The government claimed that the action would curtail the shadow economy and crack down on the use of illicit and counterfeit cash to fund illegal activity and terrorism. The sudden nature of the announcement and the prolonged cash shortages in the weeks that followed created significant disruption throughout the economy, threatening economic output. Prime Minister of India Narendra Modi announced the demonetisation in an unscheduled live televised address at 20:00 Indian Standard Time (IST) on 8 November. In the announcement, Modi declared that use of all ?500 and ?1000 banknotes of the Mahatma Gandhi Series would be invalid past midnight, and announced the issuance of new ?500 and banknotes of the Mahatma Gandhi New Series in exchange for the old banknotes. The BSE SENSEX and stock indices fell over 6 percent on the day after the announcement. In the days following the demonetisation, the country faced severe cash shortages with severe detrimental effects across the economy. People seeking to exchange their bank notes had to stand in lengthy queues, and several deaths were linked to the rush to exchange cash. Initially, the move received support from several bankers as well as from some international commentators. The move has also been criticised as poorly planned and unfair, and was met with protests, litigation, and strikes against the government in several places across India. Debates also took place concerning the move in both houses of parliament. The move reduced the country's industrial production and its GDP growth rate. By the end of August 2017, 99% of the banned currency had been deposited in banks: only approximately ?14,000 crore of the total demonetised currency had been discarded, leading analysts to state that the effort had failed to remove black money from the economy. The Indian government had demonetised bank notes on two prior occasionsدnce in 1946 and then in 1978ءnd in both cases, the goal was to combat tax evasion by "black money" held outside the formal economic system. In 1946, the pre-independence government hoped demonetisation would penalise Indian businesses that were concealing the fortunes amassed supplying the Allies in World War II. In 1978, the Janata Party coalition government demonetised banknotes of 1000, 5000 and 10,000 rupees, again in the hopes of curbing counterfeit money and black money. In 2012, the Central Board of Direct Taxes had recommended against demonetisation, saying in a report that "demonetisation may not be a solution for tackling black money or shadow economy, which is largely held in the form of benami properties, bullion and jewellery." According to data from income tax probes, black money holders kept only 6% or less of their wealth as cash, suggesting that targeting this cash would not be a successful strategy. On 28 October 2016 the total banknotes in circulation in India were valued at ?17.77 trillion (US$280 billion); what proportion of this derived from ?500 and ?1,000 banknotes was unknown. In its annual report of March 2016, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) stated that total bank notes in circulation valued ?16.42 trillion (US$260 billion) of which nearly 86% (around ?14.18 trillion (US$220 billion)) derived from ?500 and ?1,000 banknotes. In terms of volume, the report stated that 24% (around 22.03 billion) of the total 9026.6 crore (90.26 billion) banknotes in circulation were ?500 and ?1,000 banknotes. The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) had previously expressed opposition to demonetisation. BJP spokesperson Meenakshi Lekhi had said in 2014 that members of the public who were often illiterate and had no access to banking facilities would be adversely affected by such a policy. The plan to demonetise the ?500 and ?1000 banknotes was initiated between six and ten months before it was announced, and was kept confidential, with only ten people being completely aware of it. The preparations for printing new ?500 and ?2000 bank notes began in early May 2016. The Union cabinet was informed about the plan on 8 November 2016 in a meeting called by the Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi. On 8 November 2016, Modi announced the demonetisation in an unscheduled live national televised address at 20:15 Indian Standard Time. In the announcement, Modi declared circulation of all ?500 and ?1,000 banknotes of the Mahatma Gandhi Series as invalid effective from the midnight of the same day, and announced the issuance of new ?500 and banknotes of the Mahatma Gandhi New Series in exchange for the old notes. After Modi's announcement, the Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, Urjit Patel, and Economic Affairs Secretary, Shaktikanta Das, stated that while the supply of notes of all denominations had increased by 40 percent between 2011 and 2016, the ?500 and ?1,000 banknotes increased by 76 percent and 109 percent, respectively, owing to forgery. They said that forged cash was used to fund terrorist activities, and that the demonetisation was meant to counter this. Patel also stated that the decision had been made about six months ago, and the printing of new banknotes of denomination ?500 and ?2,000 had already started. However, only the top members of the government, security agencies and the central bank were aware of the move. But media had reported in October 2016 about the introduction of ?2,000 denomination well before the official announcement by RBI. This statement has led to much debate, because the Reserve Bank governor six months before the announcement was Raghuram Rajan, while the new banknotes have the signature of the newly appointed governor, Urjit Patel. The Reserve Bank of India stipulated that the demonetised notes could be deposited with banks over a period of fifty days until 30 December 2016. The banknotes could also be exchanged for legal tender over the counter at all banks. The limit for such exchange was ?4,000 per person from 8 to 13 November, was increased to ?4,500 per person from 14 to 17 November, reduced to ?2,000 per person from 18 November. International airports also facilitated an exchange of notes for foreign tourists and out-bound travelers, amounting to a total value of ?5,000 per person. The exchange of banknotes was stopped completely on 25 November: Modi had previously stated that the volume of exchange would be increased after 24 November. Cash withdrawals from bank accounts were restricted to ?10,000 per day and ?20,000 per week per account from 10 to 13 November. This limit was increased to ?24,000 per week from 14 November 2016. A daily limit on withdrawals from ATMs was also imposed varying from ?2,000 per day till 14 November, and ?2,500 per day till 31 December. This limit was increased to ?4,500 per day from 1 January, and again to ?10,000 from 16 January 2017. Limits placed vide the circulars cited above on cash withdrawals from Current accounts/ Cash credit accounts/ Overdraft accounts stand withdrawn with immediate effect. RBI increased the withdrawal limit from Savings Bank account to Rs 50,000 from the earlier Rs 24,000 on 20 February 2017 and then on 13 March 2017, it removed all withdrawal limits from Savings Bank Accounts. Under the revised guidelines issued on 17 November 2016, families were allowed to withdraw ?250,000 (?2.5 lakh) for wedding expenses from one account provided it was KYC compliant. The rules were also changed for farmers who are permitted to withdraw ?25,000 per week from their accounts against crop loans. The Specified Bank Notes (Cessation of Liabilities) Ordinance, 2016 was issued by on 28 December 2016 ceasing the liability of the government for the banned bank notes, and also imposing fines on people found carrying out transactions with them after 8 November 2016; or holding more than ten of them after 30 December 2016. The ordinance also provided for the exchange of the bank notes after 30 December for non-resident citizens and others on a case by case basis. Fuel pumps, government hospitals, railway and airline booking counters, state-government recognised dairies and ration stores, and crematoriums were allowed to accept the banned ?500 and ?1,000 bank notes until 2 December 2016. A fortnight before the official announcement, a news report in the Hindi daily Dainik Jagran quoting RBI sources speaking of the planned release of new 2000 rupee notes alongside withdrawal of 500 and 1000 rupee notes. Similar news was reported in The Hindu Business Line on 21 October 2016, also describing a forthcoming 2000 rupee note and the possible withdrawal of 500 and 1000 rupee notes. The chairman of the State Bank of India had also openly spoken in April 2016 about the possibility of demonetisation of ?500 and ?1000 notes. Prominent businessmen stated after the announcement of demonetisation that they had received prior warning of the move, allowing them to convert their money into smaller denominations. A BJP MLA from Rajasthan, Bhawani Singh Rajawat, claimed in a video that wealthy businessmen were informed about the demonetisation before it occurred. He later denied the comments. More than 30 politicians belonging to the BJP were arrested and investigated for having unaccounted money in the new 2000 rupee denomination. The decision met with mixed initial reactions. Several bankers like Arundhati Bhattacharya (Chairperson of State Bank of India) and Chanda Kochhar (MD & CEO of ICICI Bank) appreciated the move in the sense that it would help curb black money. Businessmen Anand Mahindra (Mahindra Group), Sajjan Jindal (JSW Group), Kunal Bahl (Snapdeal and FreeCharge) also supported the move adding that it would also accelerate e-commerce. Infosys founder N. R. Narayana Murthy praised the move. The Indian National Congress spokesperson Randeep Surjewala welcomed the move but remained sceptical on the consequences that would follow. Chief Minister of Bihar Nitish Kumar supported the move. The demonetisation also got support from Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh Nara Chandrababu Naidu. Former Chief Election Commissioner of India S. Y. Quraishi said demonetisation could lead to long term electoral reforms. Indian social activist Anna Hazare hailed demonetisation as a revolutionary step. The former President of India Pranab Mukherjee welcomed the demonetisation move by calling it bold step. The opinion of the masses varied both ways on micro-blogs and social media sites like Twitter. By and large, international response was positive which saw the move as a bold crackdown on corruption.International Monetary Fund (IMF) issued a statement supporting Modi's efforts to fight corruption by the demonetisation policy. Chinese state media Global Times praised the move and termed it as "fierce fight against black money and corruption." Former Prime Minister of Finland and Vice-President of European Commission Jyrki Katainen welcomed the demonetisation move stressing that bringing transparency will strengthen Indian economy.BBC's South Asia Correspondent Justin Rowlatt in his article praised the move for its secrecy and success and elaborated on reason behind demonetisation.Tim Worstall termed the demonetisation as welcome macroeconomic effect in his article in Forbes magazine. Swedish Minister of Enterprise Mikael Damberg supported the move by calling it bold decision. Indian-American economist Jagdish Bhagwati praised the demonetisation. The Indian Supreme Court while hearing one among a slew of cases filed against the sudden demonetisation decision in various courts, observed that it "appears to be carpet bombing and not surgical strike" which government repeatedly claims it to be. Nobel laureate Indian economist Amartya Sen, severely criticised the demonetisation move calling it a "despotic action" among other things. Former Senior Vice-President and Chief Economist of the World Bank, Kaushik Basu, called it a 'major mistake' and said that the 'damage' is likely to be much greater than any possible benefits. Pronab Sen, former Chief Statistician and Planning Commission of India member, called it a "hollow move" since it did not really address any of the purported goals of tackling black money or fake currency. Prabhat Patnaik, a former professor of economics at the Jawaharlal Nehru University, Delhi called the move 'witless' and 'anti-people'. He criticised the simple way in which black money was assumed as "a hoard of cash", saying that it would have little effect in eliminating "black activities" while "causing much hardship to common people." Noted economist and journalist, T. N. Ninan wrote in the Business Standard that demonetisation 'looks like a bad idea, badly executed on the basis of some half-baked notions'.Deepak Parekh (Chairman of HDFC) had initially appreciated the decision to ban the ? 500 and ? 1000 notes, but later said that the move had derailed the economy, and expressed skepticism about its outcome. Industrialist Rajiv Bajaj criticised the demonetisation, saying that not just the execution, but the concept of demonetisation was wrong in itself. Chief Ministers of several Indian states like Mamata Banerjee,Arvind Kejriwal and Pinarayi Vijayan have criticised and led major protests against the decision in their states and in parliament. Initially, the move to demonetise and try to hinder black money was appreciated, but the manner in which it was carried out by causing hardships to common people was criticised. A Public Interest Litigation (PIL) was filed in Madras High Court by M Seeni Ahamed, General Secretary of the Indian National League, to scrap the decision. The High Court dismissed the PIL stating that it could not interfere in monetary policies of the government. Similar PILs were also filed in the Supreme Court of India.Supreme Court of India is yet to decide on the matter. It is listed for hearing on 2 December 2016. Several government ministers had declared before the demonetisation that they were holding large amounts of cash, including Arun Jaitley, who had more than 65 lakh rupees in cash. This led to speculation about whether and when the ministers had deposited the cash they held. Steve Forbes described the move as 'Sickening And Immoral'. He stated that "What India has done is commit a massive theft of people's property without even the pretense of due process--a shocking move for a democratically elected government." Nobel laureate Paul Krugman said that it is difficult to see gains from demonetisation, while there may be significant costs to it. The demonetisation also came in for sharp criticism from media outside India, with the New York Times saying that the demonetisation was "atrociously planned" and that it did not appear to have combatted black money, while an article in The Guardian stated that "Modi has brought havoc to India". The Harvard Business Review called it "a case study in poor policy and even poorer execution" The frequent change in the narrative on objectives of the demonetisation to its visible impact on the poorest of the poor made other critiques calling government's narrative as spins in view of the "pointless suffering on India's poorest." A Parliamentary panel report in April 2017 stated that rural households and honest taxpayers were the worst hit by demonetisation. It said that it was not just the poor that suffered, but the manufacturing sector was impacted too. According to the panel, demonetisation created significant disruption throughout economy, because it was carried out without prior study or research. A Congress led opposition which includes 13 political parties, opposed the current government on the demonetisation issue in the Winter Session of the Indian Parliament on 16 November 2016. The Chief Minister of West Bengal Mamata Banerjee also met the President Pranab Mukherjee to oppose the demonetisation. The debate on demonetisation is known to be initiated by Indian National Congress and Anand Sharma in the Rajya Sabha on 16 November 2016, while Banerjee is known to be the first to oppose the current government on the demonetisation. On 16 November 2016, Banerjee led a rainbow delegation comprising political parties of Trinamool Congress, Aam Aadmi Party, BJP ally Shiv Sena, Patidar Anamat Andolan Samiti (of Hardik Patel) and National Conference to Rashtrapati Bhawan to protest against the decision to withdraw the ?500 and ?1000 banknotes. A memorandum was submitted to the President of India Pranab Mukherjee demanding rollback of the decision. Outside the Parliament in a rally the same day, Saugata Roy, a member of parliament from the opposition Trinamool Congress Party, commented, "People are in utter distress, especially the informal sector is totally disrupted. Poor people, daily wage earners, they're all facing difficulty." In the demonetisation debate on the first day of the winter session of Parliament at the Rajya Sabha, Pramod Tiwari from the Indian National Congress compared Narendra Modi to Benito Mussolini, Adolf Hitler and Muammar Gaddafi.Prem Chand Gupta, a member of the Rashtriya Janata Dal, questioned a statement of Modi from the unscheduled TV broadcast on 8 November, "If it was planned 10 months ago, how did RBI Governor Urjit Patel sign on new note?". Praful Patel, a member of the Nationalist Congress Party, stated that "the government was not even prepared to recalibrate the ATMs while announcing the move. People's suffering are unimaginable. Nobody is questioning the government's intention, but you are unprepared to execute the move". Later, the former Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh Mayawati Prabhu Das stated the situation to "a financial emergency", by saying "It looks as if Bharat has shut down." Also, Sitaram Yechury from Communist Party of India, questioned the government on the demonetisation move by stating "only 6% of black money in India is in cash to drive his point that demonetisation won't curb illicit wealth." On 17 November 2016, in a rally against demonetisation of ?500 and ?1000 notes, led by the Chief Minister of Delhi Arvind Kejriwal and his West Bengal counterpart Mamata Banerjee at Azadpur Mandi, the biggest vegetable and fruits wholesale hub in the national capital; Kejriwal demanded the withdrawal of demonetisation in 3 days. Banerjee also stated "I give the government 3 day ultimatum, fix things or withdraw the demonetisation scheme". In the demonetisation debate on the second and third day of the Winter Session of Parliament, on 17 and 18 November 2016, the opposition and the government clashed over the demonetisation issue, bringing the house to continuous halts. On 24 November 2016, in the demonetisation debate, the former prime minister of India Manmohan Singh said "this scheme will hurt small industries, the farming sector. The GDP can decline by about 3 per cent due to this move", while he also questioned "I would like to ask the Prime Minister examples of countries where people have deposited their money in the banks and not allowed to withdraw their own money." and later also said "It is no good that on each day banks bring out new notifications. It doesn't reflect properly on Prime Minister's Office, Finance Minister and the Reserve Bank of India. Cooperative banking system has been prevented from handling cash". Singh at last termed the demonetisation move as an "organised loot, legalised plunder of the common people". As the demonetisation was opposed in both houses of the parliament, it triggered organised nationwide strikes across India. Opposition parties like Indian National Congress, Bahujan Samaj Party, Trinamool Congress, DMK, JD(U), AIADMK, Nationalist Congress Party, Left, Rashtriya Janata Dal and the Samajwadi Party decided to observe ҁkrosh DiwasҠas, a protest campaign day on 28 November and launch protests in front of banks, demanding that money be returned to people. In the state of Bihar, 15 trains were blocked and stranded, while the states of West Bengal, Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh saw protest marches and rallies led by opposition parties. In the state of Kerala, shops and business establishments were shut, with school and colleges closed throughout the state, while movements of private vehicles were also disrupted in Northern Kerala. The government had estimated that ?3 trillion, or approximately 20%, of the demonetised notes would be permanently removed from circulation. However, by 30 December 2016, approximately 97% of the demonetised banknotes, or ?14.97 trillion ($220 billion) of the ?15.4 trillion that had been demonetised, had been deposited with the banking system. A Central Bank report released in August 2017 stated that a total 99% of the ? 500 and ? 1000 notes that were demonetised returned to the banking system, a figure far larger than the government had expected at the time of banning the notes. Therefore, the government failed in its aim of purging black money from the economy. Modi had stated that due to demonetisation, corrupt officials, businessmen and criminals נpopularly believed to hoard large amounts of illicit cash נwould be stuck with "worthless pieces of paper". Economic analyst Vivek Kaul stated in a BBC article that "demonetisation had been a failure of epic proportions." Nobel laureate Kailash Satyarthi and others working to fight human trafficking said that the note ban had led to a huge fall in sex trafficking, but that the trade had already begun rebounding by the following month. Satyarthi said the demonetisation would be effective in combating exploitation of children as well as corruption and would be a great obstacle to traffickers. However, 2 months later he expressed his disappointment on Rs 2000 notes being pushed into human trafficking in absence of other concrete steps. Demonetisation has badly hit Maoist and Naxalites as well. The surrender rate has reached its highest since demonetisation was announced. It is said that the money these organisations collected over the years have now lost their value making them take such a decision. The move also reportedly crippled Communist guerrilla groups (Naxalites) financing through money laundering. On 10 November the police arrested a petrol pump owner at Ranchi when he reportedly tried to deposit ?2.5 billion, belonging to a person affiliated with the banned Communist Party of India (Maoist). According to Chhattisgarh Police demonetisation has affected the Naxalite activities. It is reported that insurgents have stashed more than ?70 billion in the Bastar region. The scarcity of cash due to demonetisation led to chaos, and most people holding old banknotes faced difficulties in exchanging them due to endless queues outside banks and ATMs across India, which became a daily routine for millions of people waiting to deposit or exchange the ?500 and ?1000 banknotes since 9 November. ATMs were running out of cash after a few hours of being functional, and around half the ATMs in the country were non-functional. Sporadic violence was reported in New Delhi, but there were no reports of any grievous injury, people attacked bank premises and ATMs, and a ration shop was looted in Madhya Pradesh after the shop owner refused to accept ?500 banknotes. The CMD of Punjab National Bank said that panic after demonetisation started fading on 19 November 2016. As of 18 December 2016, there were still long queues at banks and ATMs. Three months after the withdrawal of banknotes, a quarter of the ATMs were still short of cash. Ҍive ATM AlertҠwas a hashtag campaign started by a group of youngsters from a Facebook community called '7PM Status'. It launched a campaign for crowdsourcing locations of ATMs in their vicinity that were live and working. The public were asked to post the location and details of ATMs that were live and dispensing cash, including a hashtag #LiveATMAlert or by tagging the group in their post in Facebook or Twitter. The group would in turn collate all gathered information and broadcast it to their followers at regular intervals. The cash shortage was still ongoing in the month of April 2017, five months after the demonetisation. According to a survey, the situation was as bad as 83% of people being unable to withdraw money in Hyderabad, while in Pune, the figure was 69%. In March 2017, the government stated that they received no official report on deaths connected to demonetisation. Several people were reported to have died from standing in queues for hours to exchange their old banknotes. Deaths were also attributed to lack of medical help due to refusal of old banknotes by hospitals. As of 15 November 2016, the attributed death toll was 25. and 33 deaths as of 18 November. In an interview, Chief Minister of Delhi Arvind Kejriwal lashed out at a BBC reporter who asked him to justify his 19 November claim that 55 deaths were linked to demonetisation. By the end of the year, opposition leaders claimed that over 100 people had died due to demonetisation. As a combined effect of demonetisation and US presidential election, the stock market indices dropped to an around six-month low in the week following the announcement. The day after the demonetisation announcement, BSE SENSEX crashed nearly 1,689 points and plunged by over 541 points. By the end of the intraday trading section on 15 November 2016, the BSE SENSEX index was lower by 565 points and the index was below 8100 intraday. After the demonetisation was announced, about 800,000 truck drivers were affected with scarcity of cash, with around 400,000 trucks stranded at major highways across India were reported. While major highway toll junctions on the Gujarat and Delhi-Mumbai highways also saw long queues as toll plaza operators refused the old banknotes. Nitin Gadkari, the Minister of Transport, subsequently announced a suspension of toll collections on all national highways across India until midnight of 11 November, later extended until 14 November and again until midnight of 18 November, and yet again till 2 December. Transactions in the Indian agriculture sector are heavily dependent on cash and were adversely affected by the demonetisation of ?500 and ?1,000 banknotes. Due to scarcity of the new banknotes, many farmers have insufficient cash to purchase seeds, fertilisers and pesticides needed for the plantation of rabi crops usually sown around mid-November. Farmers and their unions conducted protest rallies in Gujarat, Amritsar and Muzaffarnagar against the demonetisation as well as against restrictions imposed by the Reserve Bank of India on district cooperative central banks which were ordered not to accept or exchange the demonetised banknotes. The demonetisation led to unavailability of cash to pay for food products. The reduction in demand that arose in turn led to a crash in the prices of crops. Farmers were unable to recover even the costs of transportation from their fields to the market from the low prices offered. The prices dropped as low as 50 paise per kilo for tomatoes and onions. This forced the farmers across the country to dump their products in desperation. Some farmers resorted to burying unsold vegetables. Agricultural produce such as vegetables, foodgrains, sugarcane, milk and eggs were dumped on roads. Some farmers dumped their produce in protest against the government. By the second week after demonetisation of ?500 and ?1,000 banknotes, cigarette sales across India witnessed a fall of 30ִ0%, while E-commerce companies saw up to a 30% decline in cash on delivery (COD) orders. The demonetisation was initially seen by some sources as a significant step towards making India a cashless economy. Prime Minister Narendra Modi appealed to Indian population in his radio address in Dec 2016 to go cashless with slogan - Ҍess-cashҠfirst, ңashless societyҠnext. More people began using cards and e-wallets, and the demand for point of sales (POS) or card swipe machines increased. This led to the acceleration of installation of POS machines According to data of Pine Labs, the demand for its POS machines doubled after the decision. The company stated that the debit card transactions rose by 108% and credit card transactions by 60% on 9 November 2016. However concerns were raised regarding the lack security of mobile apps used for digital transactions. Several e-commerce companies hailed the demonetisation decision as an impetus to an increase in digital payments, hoping that it would lead to a decline in COD returns which could cut down their costs. In December 2016, the government launched an app called BHIM (Bharat Interface for Money) based on the Unified Payment Interface. In September 2017, Google launched its first India-only banking app using BHIM called Google Tez, that can be used by customers of over 50 banks on the UPI platform, and is available in several Indian languages. Both the Immediate Mobile Payments System (IMPS) and the United Payments Interface (UPI), which support instant payments using mobile phones, have grown substantially since demonetisation, even as cash has returned to the economy. After peaking in December 2016, digital transactions declined from January 2017 onwards, thus thwarting the objective of increasing digital payments through demonetisation. Global analysts cut their forecasts of India's GDP growth rate for the financial year 2016-17 by 0.5 to 3 percent due to demonetisation. India's GDP in 2016 is estimated to be US$2.25 trillion, hence, each 1 per cent reduction in growth rate represents a shortfall of US$22.5 billion (? 1.54 lakh crore) for the Indian economy. According to Societe Generale, India's quarterly GDP growth rates would drop below 7% for an entire year at a stretch for the first time since June 2011. India's GDP growth for the quarter Jan-Mar '17 was 6.1% as against a forecast of 7.1% by economists. The GDP growth for the entire fiscal year was 7.1%, a reduction from the 8% of the previous year. This drop in GDP was attributed to demonetisation by economists. The GDP growth rate for the quarter April - June 2017 dropped to 5.7%, in comparison to 7.9% for the same quarter in the previous year. This drop in GDP growth was attributed to demonetisation. This was the lowest growth in GDP since 2014. There was a reduction in industrial output as industries were hit by the cash crisis. The Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI) fell to 46.7 in November from 54.5 in October, recording its sharpest reduction in three years. A reading above 50 indicates growth and a reading below shows contraction. This indicates a slowdown in both, manufacturing and services industries. The PMI report showed also showed that the reduction in inflation in November was due to shortage in money supply. The growth in eight core sectors such as cement, steel and refinery products, which constitute 38% of the Index of Industrial Production (IIP), was only to 4.9 percent in November as compared with 6.6 percent in October. There was a loss of jobs due to demonetisation, particularly in the unorganised and informal sector and in small enterprises. Labour union jobs were crashed The Finance Ministry instructed all revenue intelligence agencies to join the crackdown on forex traders, hawala operators and jewellers besides tracking movement of demonetised currency notes. It was reported that the Prime Minister's Office (PMO) and the Prime Minister Modi himself were directly coordinating the raids conducted by the Income Tax, Enforcement Directorate (ED) and other agencies. As of 23 December, PMO received around 700 calls giving information about black money and it directly forwarded the information to various law enforcement agencies for further action. Income Tax departments raided various illegal tax-evasive businesses in Delhi, Mumbai, Chandigarh, Ludhiana and other cities that traded with demonetised currency. The Enforcement Directorate issued several FEMA notices to forex and gold traders. Large sum of cash in defunct notes were seized in different parts of the country. In Chhattisgarh liquid cash worth of ?4.4 million (US$69,000) was seized. As of 28 December, official sources said that the Income Tax department detected over ?41.72 billion (US$650 million) of un-disclosed income and seized new notes worth ?1.05 billion (US$16 million) as part of its country-wide operations. The department carried out a total of 983 search, survey and enquiry operations under the provisions of the Income Tax Act and has issued 5,027 notices to various entities on charges of tax evasion and hawala-like dealings. The department also seized cash and jewellery worth over ?5.49 billion (US$86 million) out of which the new currency seized (majority of them ?2000 notes) is valued at about ?1.05 billion (US$16 million). The department also referred a total of 477 cases to other agencies like the CBI and the Enforcement Directorate (ED) to probe other financial crimes like money laundering, disproportionate assets and corruption. In a period of four months from 9 November 2016 to 28 February 2017, CBDT claims to have detected an undisclosed income of over ?93.34 billion (US$1.5 billion) through more than 2,362 search, seizure and survey actions by Income Tax department. The number of I-T returns filed for 2016-17 grew by 25 per cent to 2.82 crore, and the advance tax collections during that period rose 41.8% over the 1-year period, as increased number of individuals filed their tax returns post demonetisation. The Indian officials said: "The number of returns filed as on August 5 stands at 2,82,92,955 as against 2,26,97,843 filed during the corresponding period of the fiscal year 2016-2017, registering an increase of 24.7% compared to growth rate of 9.9% in the previous year." Advance tax collections of personal income tax (i.e. other than corporate tax) as on 5 August 2017, showed a growth of about 41.79% over the corresponding period in FY 2016-2017. Personal income tax under self-assessment tax (SAT) grew at 34.25% over the corresponding period in FY 2016-2017. As the use of the demonetised notes had been allowed by the government for the payment of municipal and local body taxes, it led to people using the demonetised ?500 and ?1,000 notes to pay large amounts of outstanding and advance taxes. As a result, revenue collections of the local civic bodies jumped. The Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation reported collecting about ?1.6 billion (US$25 million) in cash payments of outstanding and advance taxes, within 4 days. The tax collection by local bodies have surged over 260% and more than 15,000 crore more after 14 days of demonetisation. The total indirect tax collection rose to 14.2% only in the month of December according to Finance Minister Arun Jaitley. Large amounts of cash in the form of new notes were seized all over the country after the demonetisation. As of December 2016, over 4 crore in new banknotes of ?2000 were seized from four persons in Bangalore, ?33 lakh in ?2000 notes were recovered from Manish Sharma, an expelled BJP leader in West Bengal, and ?1.5 crore was seized in Goa. 900 notes of the new ?2000 notes were seized from a BJP leader in Tamil Nadu. Around ?10 crore in new notes were seized in Chennai. As of 10 December, ?242 crore in new notes had been seized. It was noted in the media that while people were dying in queues to obtain a few thousand rupees in cash, persons with the right connections were able to amass crores of rupees in new notes, thus rendering the demonetisation exercise futile. The government announced that seized notes would be returned to circulation to address the shortage of cash. This announcement was in contrast to the regular practice of keeping seized cash in strong rooms until tax cases had been ruled upon in the courts. The government had initially announced that any person who is unable to deposit the old notes by 31 December 2016 would be given an opportunity to do so until a later date. However, the government allowed only NRIs to deposit old notes after 31 December 2016. As a result, many people with legitimately earned old notes were left stranded with old currency notes. This included soldiers who were on duty during the demonetisation period, people who had suffered a bereavement, and persons who had old notes received as wedding gifts before the demonetisation. Many people found small amounts of currency stashed away inside quilts, pillows, cupboards, lockers, behind old photographs and wall hangings, in some cases by family members who had died. In one case, two destitute orphans found ? 96,000 left by their mother and petitioned the Prime Minister for relief. A poor woman who was unable to get her old notes exchanged stripped outside the RBI office in desperation.OCIs and PIOs were also not allowed to exchange old notes. People petitioned the courts to allow deposit of the old banknotes. The Supreme Court of India also questioned the government on this matter. The dividend paid by the Reserve Bank to the government for the financial year 2016-17 was Rs. 30.7 lakh crore, as against the expectation of Rs. 74.9 lakh crore. This was less than half the dividend of Rs 65.9 lakh crore paid by the RBI in 2015-16. This decrease was due to demonetisation. It was estimated that this decrease in income for the government could cause the fiscal deficit for the financial year 2016-17 to increase from the targeted 3.2% to 3.4%. To avoid increasing the fiscal deficit, the government would have to reduce spending on social schemes, or increase revenue through taxes or other means. In Gujarat, Delhi and many other major cities, sales of gold increased on 9 November, with an increased 20 to 30% premium surging the price as much as ?45,000 (US$700) from the ruling price of ?31,900 (US$500) per 10 grams (0.35 oz). Income Tax officials raided multiple branches of Axis Bank and found bank officials involved in money laundering acts, exchanging old notes for gold. In India, the cash deposited into hundis, or cash collection boxes in temples and gurudwaras are exempted from inquiry by the tax department. This exemption is sometimes misused to launder money. After the note ban, there was a spike in donations in the form of the demonetised notes in temples. Authorities of Sri Jalakanteswarar temple at Vellore discovered cash worth ?4.4 million (US$69,000) from the temple hundi in the form of defunct notes. There have been reports of people circumventing the restrictions imposed on exchange transactions by conducting multiple transactions at different bank branches and also sending hired people, employees and followers in groups to exchange large amounts of banned currency at banks. In response, the government announced that it would start marking customers with indelible ink. This was in addition to other measures proposed to ensure that the exchange transactions are carried out only once by each person. As soon as the demonetisation was announced, it was observed by the Indian Railways authorities that a large number of people started booking tickets particularly in classes 1A and 2A for the longest distance possible, to get rid of unaccounted cash. A senior official said, "On November 13, 42.7 million passengers were nationally booked across all classes. Of these, only 1,209 were 1A and 16,999 for 2A. It is a sharp dip from the number of passengers booked on November 9, when 27,237 passengers had booked tickets in 1A and 69,950 in 2A." The Railways Ministry and the Railway Board responded swiftly and decided that cancellation and refund of tickets of value ?10,000 and above will not be allowed by any means involving cash. The payment can only be through cheque/electronic payment. Tickets above ?10,000 can be refunded by filing ticket deposit receipt only on surrendering the original ticket. A copy of the PAN card must be submitted for any cash transaction above ?50,000. The railway claimed that since the Railway Board on 10 November imposed a number of restrictions to book and cancel tickets, the number of people booking 1A and 2A tickets came down. The Enforcement Directorate raided several forex establishments making back dated entries. Money laundering using backdated accounting was carried out by co-operative banks, jewellers, sellers of iPhones, and several other businesses.
    Sentence 2 : Effects Of Demonetisation On India's GDP - Difficult To Calculate, We Don't Even Know The Sign The demonetisation effort being led by PM Modi in India is that idea that Rs 500 and Rs 1,000 notes should be declared no longer legal tender, to be replaced by other notes of different designs and in one case, denominations. The aim is to wash the stock of "black money" out of the economy and get it into the licit, banked and taxable, part of the economy. The microeconomic effects here seem, as I've said before, to be beneficial. There have long been concerns about terror financing through forged notes for example. There's quite obviously substantial tax revenue going uncollected. And perhaps the biggest effect is, as I've said, that large portions of the population feel that the basic system is unfair. They're locked out of that easier world where matters are settled in large amounts of cash, where tax is not paid and where favours are bought. However, we should also think about the macroeconomic effects here. And that's difficult--because we're not even sure what the sign of the effect will be, positive or negative, let alone the size of it. It's actually possible for this to run either way: Ambit Capital, a respected Mumbai-based equity research firm, has officially estimated that the demonetisation-driven cash crunch will result in GDP growth crashing to 0.5% in the second half of financial year 2016-17. This means the GDP growth for six months, from October 2016 to March 2017, could decelerate to 0.5%, down from 6.4% in the previous six months. Further, Ambit Capital estimates that during the October to December quarter that we are currently in, the GDP growth may contract, thus showing negative growth. However, Ambit is hopeful that a strong formalisation of the informal economy will ensue through 2017 until 2019 and this disruption could also crimp GDP growth in 2017-18 to 5.8 % from their earlier estimate of 7.3%. That's perhaps the case for the prosecution. The disruption to the economy will be such that there will be, possibly, not just no growth in this last quarter of the year but actually a shrinking of the economy. "The demonetisation-driven cash crunch that is playing out in India will paralyse economic activity in the short term. We expect a strong 'formalisation effect' to play out as nearly half of the non-tax paying businesses in the informal sector (40% share in GDP) will become unviable and cede market share to their organised sector counterparts. We expect this dynamic to crimp GDP growth in India in FY18 as well and hence we have cut our FY18 GDP growth estimate to 5.8 per cent YoY (from 7.3 per cent)," Ambit economists Ritika Mankar Mukherjee, Sumit Shekhar and Prashant Mittal said in a note. It's a possibility, certainly. But it's not a certainty. For economies are complex things with many moving parts. I've already pointed out that the inflow of money into bank accounts will reduce interest rates and that has a stimulatory effect upon economic growth. And we're reducing the budget deficit as some of that black money gets taxed, which will reduce inflation--again beneficial. But there's yet one more thing we need to consider and that's the effect upon the money supply. Which is surprisingly difficult to work out: In mathematical terms, velocity of money is the ratio between GDP and money in circulation—which RBI estimates to be around 1.3 for India. However by ‘money’, it does not mean the cash that we exchange in day-to-day transactions (part of something called high powered money or M0). Instead it is broad money (also known as M3) where you also include bank deposits, post office savings and other bits and pieces of financial savings. M3 and M0 in India are linked by a factor of 6—so roughly speaking, R1 of cash in circulation, ultimately adds up to R6 worth of broad money. So, if velocity of money calculated using broad money is 1.3, then it equates to six-times the amount, or 7.8 with respect to cash in circulation. So we now have a measure of how quickly transactional cash changes hands in the legitimate Indian economy. It's worth reading that analysis in full as it is very thought provoking. And the thought it provokes in me is that we just don't know. We don't even know, again, what the sign on the effect will be, positive or negative, let alone the size of it. We've the two types of money, M0 and M4 (to use the English terms) base money and broad. One is just cash and central bank reserves, the other is that multiplied by the velocity of money and the actions of the banking system. We're taking some portion of base money out of the system--whatever portion of black money simply vanishes as a result of demonetisation. A decrease in the money supply is contractionary upon the economy. However, look at our problem here. We've got a good idea of what V, velocity, is in the formal economy. And we don't know what it is in the informal or black economy. And we really don't know, we've not a clue, not a scoobie. Which is something of a problem because we can surmise it either way. We could assume that those who commit their nefarities with black money quickly move that on so as to be able to gain more. V in the informal economy would be high therefore. We might also assume that people stash the cash nuder the bed and it stays there for years. V would be very low therefore. In fact, we will, obviously, assume that some people do the one, some the other, and many do either dependent upon their whims. Which means that we've simply got no idea at all, not that scoobie, about what the overall effect is. If V is very much lower in the informal economy then even with the loss of some of that base money and the move of the rest into the formal banking system then the broad money supply will expand as a result. That's stimulatory. If V is higher in that informal economy than in the formal then the demonetisation move significantly reduces the broad money supply and that's contractionary. And we've not that scoobie about which way it will go. All of which rather brings us to Hayek's point, that we can't plan an economy. The major reason being that it's too complicated and we can never gain enough information to be able to do so. More than that, the only thing we've got which can calculate an economy is the economy itself. The effects of change are emergent from the system itself, not something that we can determine beforehand. Thus we just don't know what the macroeconomic effect of demonetisation is going to be. It's something we've just got to wait and see about.
    Sentence 3 : India’s demonetized currency finds its way back into the system — but can we still call it a success? India’s demonetized currency finds its way back into the system — but can we still call it a success? India's demonetization policy failed to purge black money from the market, but analysts still view it as a success. Prime Minister Narendra Modi's BJP party saw a resounding electoral win in March, following implementation. The program has improved tax returns and encourage digital payments, figures suggest. India's demonetized currency may have found its way back into the system but analysts suggest that far from tarnishing Prime Minister Narendra Modi's image, the strategy will ultimately be viewed as a success. div > div.group > p:first-child"> "It's important to remember that the demonetization move was intended more as a political move than as an economic one," noted New York-based South Asia-focused Eurasia Group analyst Sasha Riser-Kositsky. "The drama of demonetization allowed Prime Minister Narendra Modi to demonstrate in a very visible way his commitment to fighting corruption and black money." Earlier this week, the annual report from the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), the country's central bank, found that a total of 15.28 trillion rupees ($239 billion) worth of cancelled high-value notes were deposited or exchanged for new money in the 10 months since the strategy was implemented – just one percent shy of the number in circulation before the plans came in. The results suggest a damning failure for Modi and his flagship policy. In November last year, Modi announced the radical step to demonetize the currency notes in order to tackle the rampant problem of the so-called black money – billions of dollars' worth of cash in unaccounted wealth and fake currency notes. The government decided to introduce a new 500 rupee note and also introduce a higher denomination banknote of 2,000 rupees. Opponents hit out at Modi and accused him of damaging the economy and tarnishing the country's credibility at home and abroad. First quarter gross domestic product (GDP) data released Thursday marked a three-year-low of 5.7 percent, versus 7.9 percent the year before. The RBI had to spend 79.65 billion rupees on quickly printing updated replacements for the 500 rupee ($7) and 1,000 rupee notes which were abruptly banned at midnight on November 8 last year, according to the central bank's annual report. show chapters [Image: How to build a cashless society? Give people no other choice] How to build a cashless society? Give people no other choice 11:45 AM ET Fri, 11 Aug 2017 04:08 Meanwhile cash-dependent small businesses and poorer citizens – those Modi had claimed to be helping – have been badly hurt by note-shortages this year. Prior to the data release, it was unclear how successful Modi's policy had been, and as such his political motives were enough to win him favor with India's vast segment of poorer voters at the polls. His Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) won overwhelming support in March elections in Uttar Pradesh, India most populous and one of its poorest states. "The government and its supporters can argue that even if demonetization failed to remove black money from circulation, that at least Modi and the government tried to do something about it," Riser-Kositsky told CNBC via email. But politics aside, analysts claim that the economic benefits will emerge over time. "The demonetisation campaign clearly contributed to economic slowdown, reflected in poor GDP figures in April-June. In hindsight, this can be deemed a failure from an economic point of view," Firat Unlu, leading India analyst at the Economist Intelligence Unit, told CNBC. "Still, assuming that demonetisation is complemented by efforts to enhance tax compliance, then some success can be salvaged and lead to higher government revenue." [Image: An Indian bank employee counts old 500 and 1000 rupee notes in Guwahati, the capital city of the north-eastern state of Assam on December 30, 2016.] Biju Boro AFP Getty Images An Indian bank employee counts old 500 and 1000 rupee notes in Guwahati, the capital city of the north-eastern state of Assam on December 30, 2016. As a result of demonetization, and in tandem with Modi's 'Digital India' strategy, which aims to expand India's online infrastructure, the country now sits on a treasure trove of data. The government has been gradually making enrolment to its national electronic database 'Aadhaar' mandatory for tax returns, opening of bank accounts and any purchases above 50,000 rupees. It is estimated that over 99 percent of Indians aged 18 and above are now enrolled in the scheme. This means that the government can expect to see the benefits of taxation on previously hidden black money over the coming months and years. India's finance ministry says it is probing 1.8 million bank accounts where cash inflows during the demonetization period "did not appear in line with its tax profile," meaning it can expect some belated tax payments. "There are also long-term benefits from demonetization in terms of increasing income tax payments going forward and encouraging the use of digital payments over cash, a means of encouraging better tax compliance among businesses," Riser-Kositsky explained. However, whether it is a model to be replicated by other countries struggling to combat corruption and illicit money is not yet clear. For Unlu, the initial economic fallout may be too much for other economies to stomach. "On balance, governments abroad are unlikely to replicate India's experiment given the economic fallout," he said. Traditionally, other governments have only embarked on demonetization schemes in times of extreme need, such as hyperinflation, political upheaval and wars.
    Sentence 4 : PM Modi's demonetisation brings GDP down to 6.1 per cent: Top economists stand vindicated Barely six months after demonetisation, India's Gross Domestic Product or GDP growth rate has slumped down to 6.1 per cent in the January-March period, lowest in more than two years. This growth rate was unexpected as the Central Statistics Office earlier in January had estimated 7.1 per cent growth as compared to the 7.6 per cent in 2015-16. With this March quarter report, India lost its status as the world's fastest growing major economy. Read Also: Arun Jaitley defends GDP figures, demonetisation Last year, when the Prime Minister demonetised old Rs 500 and Rs 1000 currency notes it was feared that the country's economy would be severely hit. The opposition parties expressed their concerns over job loss and slow down in informal sector, but the government agencies maintained that impact would be short-term and marginal. Not only politicians but top-notched economists were also divided over the real effect of the demonetisation. Now that we know how note ban has brought down India's economic growth rate to 6.1 per cent, it's time to go over and see what the economists had predicted and how accurate they are. However, the real impact could be much more as 'India's statistical machinery does not capture data on the informal economy on a regular basis'. Fitch cut GDP growth rate to 6.9 per cent Global rating agency Fitch earlier in January had lowered its GDP growth forecasts for India to 6.9 per cent from 7.4 per cent saying there will be 'temporary disruptions' to economic activity post demonetisation. The new forecasts came a day before the central government released GDP numbers for the July-September quarter of fiscal 2016-17. HSBC predicted GDP growth down by 1 per cent Global financial services major HSBC released a report after demonetisation and said: "India's economic growth is expected to fall by up to 1 percentage points over the next 12 months in the wake of demonetisation, while longer-term gains will depend on follow-up reforms." "Using the cash elasticity of GDP, we estimate that over a year, economic growth can fall by 0.7-1.0 percentage points, with the maximum impact in the immediate two quarters, which will see a large contraction in 'effective' money supply," HSBC said in a research note. Dr Manmohan Singh predicted 2 per cent fall Former Prime Minister Dr Manmohan Singh slammed the demonetisation move and called it a 'monumental mismanagement' that might bring GDP down by 2 per cent. "In my opinion that the way the scheme has been implemented will hurt agricultural growth in our country, will hurt small industry, will hurt all those people who are in the informal sector of the economy. And my own feeling is that the national income, that is the GDP, can decline by about 2 per cent as a result of what has been done. This is an underestimate," Dr Singh said. Here's what other economists had to say Kaushik Basu Former Vice-President and Chief Economist of the World Bank Kaushik Basu had said that demonetisation's effect would be disastrous. "It (Demonetization) was poorly designed, with scant attention paid to the laws of the market, and it is likely to fail. So far its effects have been disastrous for the middle- and lower-middle classes, as well as the poor. And the worst may be yet to come," Basu wrote in The New York Times. In a recent article in the Indian Express, Basu again said demonetisation was 'a monetary policy blunder'. "India's GDP growth rate of around 7 per cent over 2016-17 is commendable; tribute goes to policy initiatives such as the GST and the new bankruptcy law. However, these policies, coupled with two global trends, should have propelled India to a growth rate of over 8 per cent, the kind it had achieved before 2008," Basu wrote. Amartya Sen Nobel laureate Amartya Sen said demonetisation was a gigantic mistake. He was speaking with India Today's Karan Thapar where he said: "It is a gigantic mistake, both in terms of its objective of dealing with corruption as well as the objective of one rapid jump of getting into a cashless economy." "I find no reasoning behind this decision. It will have adverse effects," he added. Arun Shourie Former economist at the World Bank Arun Shourie said demonetisation was the 'greatest blunder in economic policy for 70 years'. Speaking to NDTV, he said: "The stated objective of getting at black money, everybody would say is wonderful. But I don't think this is the strike, which has been well thought through. This is a strike not on black money. It is a strike on the legal tender of India, on the currency. It is a strike on cash transactions." Shourie further argued: "People who hold the black money or those who have black assets, they don't hold them in cash. One per cent of Indians hold 53 per cent of total assets in India. 10 per cent hold upto 85 per cent. Now these are the rich fellows, who will be having even larger proportion of the black money. They are not going to put the black money under the mattress." Kishore Mahbubani An Indian-origin academic and former Singapore diplomat Kishore Mahbubani said Indian economy would grow faster than China despite the temporary slowdown created by demonetisation. "Even if the demonetisation created a slowdown, it is not going to change the long-term momentum of where India is going with its economic growth," said Dean Kishore Mahbubani of the Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy at the National University of Singapore. "India will grow faster than China even after this (demonetisation) slow down. There is a lot of momentum in the Indian economy," Mahbubani further said.
    Sentence 5 : Viewpoint: Why Modi's currency gamble was 'epic failure' India's attempt to flush out undeclared wealth did not work, central bank figures show. The move, known as "demonetisation", was a flagship policy of Prime Minister Narendra Modi. Economic analyst Vivek Kaul looks at what went wrong. The devil, as they say, is in the detail. On page 195 of this year's Reserve Bank of India (RBI) annual report lies the answer to the question many Indians have been asking for close to 10 months. Has demonetisation been a success or a failure? As per the RBI data, it's safe to say that demonetisation has been a failure of epic proportions. On 8 November last year, the Modi government decided to demonetise 500 ($7; £6) rupee and 1,000 rupee notes, which were worth 15.44tn rupees in total. The idea was to target both counterfeit currency and "black money", or unaccounted wealth, the prime minister told the nation. This was backed up by the government press release accompanying the decision. Black money is essentially money that has been earned but on which taxes haven't been paid. Media captionOld 500 and 1,000 rupee notes went out of circulation in a few hours At midnight, just hours after the announcement, the 500 and 1,000 rupee notes were worthless. People holding these notes had to deposit them in their bank accounts. This money could later be withdrawn, though there were restrictions on the amount of money that could be withdrawn immediately. The hope was that black money held in the form of cash wouldn't be deposited into banks, given that people holding it wouldn't want to be identified - in the process, a vast amount of illegal money would be destroyed. But the RBI report tells a different story. It says that illegal notes worth 15.28tn rupees ($242bn) had been deposited in banks up to 30 June. This basically means that almost 99% of the "demonetised" money was deposited into banks. Hence, almost all the black money held in the form of cash also made it back into the banks and wasn't really destroyed, as had been hoped. The conventional explanation for this is that most people who had black money found other people, who did not have black money, to deposit their savings into the banking system for them. As far as detecting counterfeit currency is concerned, nothing much seems to have happened on this front either. Data from the RBI annual report tells us that the total number of fake 500 rupee (old series) and 1,000 rupee notes detected between April 2016 and March 2017 was 573,891. The total number of notes withdrawn stood at 24.02bn. This basically means that as a proportion, the counterfeit notes identified between April 2016 and March 2017 represent close to 0% of the withdrawn notes. In the previous year, the total number of counterfeit 500 and 1,000 rupee notes detected stood at 404,794. And this happened without any demonetisation. Hence, demonetisation has failed in its two major objectives. Illegal cash crackdown failed - bank report Why India wiped out 86% of its cash overnight Currency move was 'bad economics' India's cash crisis explained 'eDesperate housewives' scramble to change secret savings The funny thing is that there were no estimates of how much black money was held in the form of cash. The government admitted as much, after having announced the policy. Finance Minister Arun Jaitley said so in a written reply to a question in the lower house of parliament, the Lok Sabha, on 16 December 2016. Raids carried out by the Income Tax Department suggested that people tended to hold about 5% of their black money in the form of cash. But even this lack of data in the public domain did not stop economists from coming up with their own sets of numbers, trying to defend the decision of the Modi government, and failing to explain what logic they based their assumptions on. India's large cash economy was badly hit by the policy. Even the Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh (the labour wing of the governing Bharatiya Janata Party) admitted: "As many as 250,000 units in the unorganised sector were closed and the real estate sector was badly affected, with a large number of workers losing their jobs." Agriculture, a sector which largely operates on cash, was hard hit too, with farmers not being paid enough for vegetables and pulses they had grown. Many protested and several state governments waived payments on farm loans. Image copyrightAFP Image caption New 2,000 rupee denomination notes were introduced Over and above this, the government's policy caused a huge cash shortage, with people having to spend many days standing in ATM lines trying to withdraw their own money. Some even died in the process. As far as the Modi government is concerned, it is unlikely to admit it was a big mistake and will continue to put a positive spin on it, as it has since last November. Things will not change on that front. To conclude, no relatively healthy economy has ever carried out demonetisation. As the latest Economic Survey of the government of India points out: "India's demonetisation is unprecedented in international economic history, in that it combined secrecy and suddenness amidst normal economic and political conditions. All other sudden demonetisations have occurred in the context of hyperinflation, wars, political upheavals or other extreme circumstances." The real costs of this unprecedented event are only just starting to come out.
    Sentence 6 : One year of demonetisation: How much note ban has changed India To break the grip of corruption and black money, we have decided that the 500 rupee and 1,000 rupee currency notes presently in use will no longer be legal tender from midnight tonight, that is, 8th November 2016." With these words, Prime Minister Narendra Modi had announced demonetisation a year ago that took everyone by surprise. One year down the line, the jury is still out on the success of the Narendra Modi government's decision to discontinue about 15.4 lakh crore of currencies in denominations of Rs 500 and Rs 1000. The objectives of demonetisation, as defined by government in various phases, were to crack a whip against black money, fight counterfeit currency in circulation, formalisation of cash-dependent businesses, bringing back money lying idle in the banking system and hitting hard at the financial backbone of terrorism and naxalism. HOW MONEY FOUND WAY TO BANKS? According to Union Finance Minister Arun Jaitley's statement in Parliament, Rs 4.9 lakh crore was deposited in about 1.48 lakh bank accounts post-demonetisation. These were high value deposits of over Rs 80 lakh each. The average deposit size was over Rs 3.3 crore for all 1.48 lakh bank accounts. Smaller deposits, ranging Rs 2 lakh to Rs 80 lakh, were made in about 1.09 crore bank accounts after demonetisation was announced. The average deposit size in these accounts was Rs 5 lakh. According to one estimate the total deposits made after demonetisation accounted for more than Rs 10 lakh or simply about two-thirds of the total demonetised money. In August, the Reserve Bank of India declared in its annual report, that of demonetised currencies worth Rs 15.4 lakh crore, the high value notes worth Rs 15.3 lakh crore were deposited in the banks. This means, about 99 per cent of the demonetised currency came back to the banking system by June 30. Several critics raised questions about the success of demonetisation saying that coming back of almost entire invalidated currency stock into the banking system meant, the government could not find any black with the note ban. However, the real import of the figures could be gauged only after the taxmen have done their job by establishing money trail. ACTION AGAINST BLACK MONEY The government has projected demonetisation is a big ongoing success story in fight against black money. Addressing a rally in Himachal Pradesh yesterday, PM Narendra Modi yesterday said, "Rs 4,000 crore fraud found in probe into 5,000 companies out of 3 lakh that have shut down after demonetisation." The Ministry of Corporate Affairs in a release said, "Preliminary enquiry on the basis of information received from 56 banks in respect of 35,000 companies involving 58,000 accounts has revealed that an amount of over Rs 17,000 crore was deposited and withdrawn post demonetisation." In one case, a company which had a negative opening balance on November 8, 2016, deposited and withdrew Rs 2,484 crore post-demonetisation. "Based on the massive drive undertaken by Ministry of Corporate Affairs around 2.24 lakh companies have been struck off till date for remaining inactive for a period of two years or more," the statement read. Earlier, the government said that 1.63 lakh companies were shut down across the country on the basis of data mined after demonetisation. Of these, nearly 38,000 were found to be shell companies - firms in existence not for business but financial deception. Assuming that government's that most black money has been detected after demonetisation, economist Surjit Bhalla estimated that the move would yield Rs 2.5 lakh crore additional revenue in the first year while Rs 1.5 lakh crore additional earning will accrue to the central coffer every year in perpetuity. TACKLING COUNTERFEIT CURRENCY As per the records available in public domain till date, demonetisation does not seem to have been a blow to fake currency business. According to the National Investigation Agency, counterfeit currencies worth only Rs 400 crore were in circulation in 2015. This was found to be about 0.028 per cent of the total currency in circulation. Earlier this year, a report suggested that of all the returned Rs 1000 notes, only 0.0007 per cent was found to be counterfeit. Of the all the returned Rs 500 notes, 0.002 per cent was counterfeit. The total value of the fake currency notes identified by the banks of the returned demonetised currency is Rs 41 crore. The critics argue that either the banks failed to distinguish counterfeit currencies from the genuine ones on mass scale or the counterfeit currency did not exist in the measure expected by the government. DIGITAL PUSH BY DEMONETISATION Among other things, demonetisation brought digital cash payment awareness in the country. According to the Payments Council of India, the growth rate of the digital payments industry accelerated post-demonetisation by 40-70 per cent. It was earlier in the range of 20-50 per cent. The spike in digital transactions was evident soon after demonetisation but it saw decline in the subsequent months with remonetisation eased currency shortage. In November last year, there were 671.49 million digital transactions which increased to 957.50 million in December. But, by July it had come down to 862.38 million digital payments. In terms of value of digital transactions, November 2016 saw digital payments worth Rs 94 lakh crore. They rose to Rs 149 lakh crore in March. The corresponding figure for July was Rs 107 lakh crore. As per records, digital money transfer through Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) and National Electronic Funds Transfer (NEFT) grew by 6 per cent in terms of number and by 20 per cent in value of transactions this year in comparison 2016-17. FISCAL GROWTH AND INSURGENCIES In the first fiscal quarter after demonetisation was announced, the GDP growth rate fell to 6.1 per cent compared to 7.9 for the same period the previous year. The GDP growth rate further slipped to 5.7 for April-June quarter compared to 7.1 for the corresponding period last year. But, it is not clear yet, if the decline in GDP growth rate was due to demonetisation or a continuation of the trend after the last quarter of 2015-16. Further, pre-GST uncertainty is said to have played a major role in production sluggishness in April-June period this fiscal. Expectations are that the GDP figures for June-September would show a revival trend. Another argument for demonetisation was to break the backbone of terrorism and naxalism. However, there is not adequate proof to back the claim. Incidents of terrorism have seen spurt in Kashmir Valley where the casualties on both sides have gone up sharply. Maoist insurgency has shown decline. But, activists working in the affected regions have credited the law enforcing and counter-insurgency agencies for what is perceived as a dull phase in naxal insurgency in eastern states. Demonetisation came as a major disruption that, many economists believed, was necessary for the Indian economy before it could be projected to the next level. Demonetisation further got integrated with the Goods and Services Tax (GST) rollout. The government expects that the twin measures would pay rich dividends in terms of revenue to carry out its social welfare and development programmes while cracking down on black money.
cluster 2
    Sentence 1 : Demonetisation: Nearly 99% of Scrapped Notes Came Back into System Roughly 89 million of the 6.7 billion Rs 1,000 notes in existence were not deposited following demonetisation and still remain in circulation. Credit: PTI New Delhi: The Reserve Bank of India on Wednesday released the much-awaited numbers behind the Modi government’s demonetisation exercise. The result? Rs 15.28 lakh crore out of the Rs 15.44 lakh crore in currency that was rendered invalid on November 8, 2016 has come back into the Indian banking system. This means that 98.96% of Rs 1,000 and Rs 500 notes that were banned as a result of demonetisation were returned to the central bank by the end of June 2017. The central bank however does caution that it is still in the process of checking and verifying soiled and questionable bank notes. “Subject to future corrections based on verification process when completed, the estimated value of SBNs received on June 30, 2017 is Rs 15.28 lakh crore,” the central bank states. The numbers come as part of the RBI’s annual report, which also shows that out of the 6.7 billion Rs 1,000 notes, 89 million notes are still in circulation and therefore have not come back into the system. “The value of banknotes in circulation declined by 20.2% over the year to Rs 13,102 billion as at end-March 2017. The volume of banknotes, however, increased by 11.1%, mainly due to higher infusion of banknotes of lower denomination in circulation following the demonetisation,” the RBI notes. On November 8, 2016, the Modi government kicked off a massive demonetisation exercise in a move that was aimed at curbing black money, fake currency and corruption. Since then it has been a widely debated topic, with analysts and economists wondering whether the benefits trumped the costs. In the immediate weeks after demonetisation, one school of thought believed that if a sizeable amount of demonetisation notes didn’t return to the RBI (presumably because the owners of the notes feared getting caught for tax evasion, this could translate into a “windfall gain” for the Modi government. The government itself believed that roughly Rs 2 -3 lakh crore would not return, according to statements the-then attorney general made before the Supreme Court in November 2016. With 99% of demonetised notes coming back, this no longer seems likely. How have, in value terms the Rs 500 and Rs 2,000 banknotes fared? “In value terms, the share of 500 and above banknotes, which had together accounted for 86.4% of the total value of banknotes in circulation at end-March 2016, stood at 73.4% at end-March 2017. The share of newly introduced 2000 banknotes in the total value of banknotes in circulation was 50.2% at end-March 2017. In volume terms, 10 and 100 banknotes constituted 62.0% of total banknotes in circulation at end-March 2017 as compared with 53.0% at end-March 2016,” the annual report notes. Nepal, Bhutan factors Currently, there is Rs 16,000 crore, in the form of demonetised Rs 500 and Rs 1,000 notes, that haven’t made their way back into the Indian banking system. As The Wire has reported in the past, a certain amount of these banknotes are in India’s neighbouring countries. In Bhutan and Nepal in particular, Indian rupees are used more often than not as a valid form of currency. In Bhutan, the total amount of Indian rupee notes deposited by locals was Rs 1.60 billion or Rs 160 crore as per the country’s central bank. Although news reports have indicated that the country holds Rs 3,000 crore worth of banned Indian currency, the sourcing of this figure is not clear. As The Wire has reported, Indian rupees do account for 30% of Bhutan’s foreign exchange reserves (roughly Rs 37 billion or 3,700 crore), it’s not clear whether this is held in the form of Rs 500 and Rs 1,000 notes. When it comes to Nepal, the situation is a little more complex. Although Indian news reports have identified Nepalese citizens has holding an estimated Rs 3,200 crore, sources tell The Wire that Nepal is yet to come up with an accurate estimate on the total number of Indian banknotes in the country. “The factual position right now is that RBI and NRB [Nepal’s central bank] have yet to reach a decision,” a senior government official told The Wire. Cost of printing The central bank also states that the total expenditure incurred on printing bank notes for the year July 2016- June 2017 was Rs 79.65 billion as opposed to Rs 34.2 billion during 2015-16. “The upsurge in expenditure during the year was on account of change in the production plan of printing presses due to the introduction of new design notes in higher denominations as well as the requirement of larger volume of notes for replacement of the demonetised currency,” the report states. What does 99% of currency coming back mean? If Rs 15.28 lakh crore out of Rs 15.44 lakh crore has come back into the system what does this mean for black money? According to analysts, there are two broad explanations. One, the proportion of black money that was held in the form of cash was quite low. Or two, the proportion of Rs 500 and Rs 1,000 notes that was black money has been successfully laundered back into the system. *Includes RBI-regulated eight All-India Financial Institutions, insurance companies, housing finance institutions, non-banking financial companies, chit-funds etc. **Includes intermediaries registered with SEBI, viz., stock brokers, merchant bankers, portfolio managers, foreign institutional investors, etc. Another inference from most of the money returning is that the I-T department has a lot of work ahead of itself in analysing the money has returned. As seen from the table above, the RBI does note that the amount of “suspicious transactions” reported by various financial institutions in India has increased sharply. Banks alone reported 3,61,214 suspicious transactions in 2016-17. However, it remains to be seen whether this will translate into solid tax evasion cases or convictions. Fake and counterfeit notes, a reckoning Another much-touted advantage of demonetisation is that would help curb the amount of fake currency in circulation – fake currency that the Modi government believed helped anti-social elements engage in criminal activities. Niti Aayog member and economist Bibek Debroy, in the months after demonetisation, claimed that the total value of counterfeit or fake Indian currency was in the range of Rs 2,000 crore. This figure was fact-checked by The Wire at the time. The RBI notes that the “detection of counterfeit notes increased across denominations – notably, Rs 500 and Rs 1,000 – during 2016-17”. As can be seen from the table above, in 2015-16, roughly 143,099 ‘Rs 1,000 notes’ were detected as fake or counterfeit. This shot up to 256,324 in 2016-17. The total value of fake notes discovered over the last year was Rs 41 crore – a far cry from the Rs 2,000 crore figure that Debroy claims is still circulating in the Indian economy. A note circulated by SBI chief economist Soumya Kanti Ghosh notes that while increased detection of counterfeit notes is heartening, its still disappointing. “On a positive note, the detection of counterfeit old 500 and 1000 denomination notes has witnessed an increase of 42% in 2017. However, the value of such notes is a minuscule Rs 41 crore,” Ghosh states.
    Sentence 2 : 99% of demonetised notes returned, says RBI report The Reserve Bank of India’s annual report has finally revealed that as much as ₹15.28 lakh crore of the high-value currency that was demonetised in November returned to the central bank. “Subject to future corrections, based on the verification process when completed, the estimated value of SBNs [specified bank notes] received as on June 30, 2017, is ₹15.28 trillion,” the RBI said in a report released on Wednesday. Intense scrutiny The central bank was under intense scrutiny since January — after the window for depositing the withdrawn ₹500 and ₹1,000 banknotes had closed — for details on the extent of currency that was returned to the RBI in the wake of the government’s sudden decision to withdraw high-value banknotes as a means to combating counterfeiting, black money and the financing of terrorist activities. ALSO READ Shame on RBI for recommending demonetisation: Chidambaram The latest RBI data showed that 98.96% of the withdrawn currency — at the time of demonetisation the value of old ₹500 and ₹1,000 notes in circulation was ₹15.44 lakh crore — was deposited with the banks. Separately, the data showed that the share of the newly introduced ₹2,000 banknotes in the total value of currency in circulation was 50.2% at end-March 2017. Finance Minister Arun Jaitley said on Wednesday that the confiscation of money was never the objective of the demonetisation exercise. “That people have been compelled to deposit even black money into banks is itself a good evidence of its [success].” graphJPG Mr. Jaitley said that the high growth in income tax returns and the robust GST inflows indicated that more and more people now preferred to undertake ‘white money’ transactions. ALSO READ Objective of demonetisation was not confiscation of money, says Arun Jaitley “With RBI disclosing the numbers of returned notes today [Wednesday] and the measure having been successfully implemented, the debate should be over,” said Economic Affairs Secretary Subhash Garg. Mr. Garg called for a conclusion of note-ban linked arguments as the “short-term negative impacts on economic activity had played out fully and long-term positives will continue to strengthen fundamentals.” The final deposit figures could still rise since on June 20, 2017, the government allowed District Central Cooperative Banks to deposit the withdrawn notes that had been accepted by them from customers between November 10-14. The central bank also said it was in discussion with the government whether to accept the demonetised notes held by citizens and financial institutions in Nepal. Data in the annual report showed that only 89 million pieces of ₹1,000 were not deposited. The politics of demonetisation As of March 2016, there were 6,326 million pieces of ₹1,000 banknotes in circulation. In 2016-2017, another 925 million pieces of ₹1,000 notes were supplied into the system by the currency printing presses.
    Sentence 3 : How demonetisation affected the Indian economy, in 10 charts New Delhi: A year ago, Prime Minister Narendra Modi announced the scrapping of high-value banknotes which amounted to 86% of currency in circulation. The demonetisation of currency notes was supposed to be an attack on black money, on counterfeit notes, and projected as part of a broader push to promote digitization and non-cash payments. A year later, progress on all these counts appears to be very modest, and should make us question whether this exercise was needed at all to fulfil its stated aims. The costs imposed by the currency-scrapping exercise were, however, quite severe, at least in the short term, disrupting ordinary life across the country for several weeks. The hardest-hit were those in rural areas, where access to banking and the internet are quite low. A 2016 Reserve Bank of India (RBI) report on branch authorization policy classified 93% of rural centres in the country as unbanked, with the population dependent on roving banking correspondents and on distant urban or semi-urban branches. Access to the internet is equally patchy, with only 3% of households in underdeveloped rural areas reporting access to internet in a 2016 consumer economy survey. Click here for enlarge Economic costs The rural and informal economy suffered disproportionately because most transactions are cash-based. The liquidity squeeze led to a pile-up at wholesale markets, leading to a sharp decline in the Wholesale Price Index (WPI) of perishables such as fruits and vegetables in the immediate aftermath of demonetisation. By turning farm markets into buyers’ markets, demonetisation may have also contributed to the decline in prices of pulses. Rural consumer sentiment too took a hit, with domestic sales of two-wheelers plunging sharply. Car sales also declined but the decline was less severe than in the case of two-wheelers. The slowdown in the economy, which started before demonetisation, also seems to have been exacerbated by demonetisation. New project announcements declined sharply in the wake of demonetisation, a Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy (CMIE) analysis showed, hurting the capex cycle. Contrary to what some economists predicted, the dividend from RBI to the government was lower because of demonetisation. RBI’s domestic earnings declined as it had to pay interest of Rs17,426 crore after it mopped up excess liquidity in the banking system following demonetisation. The previous year, the central bank had earned interest of Rs506 crore in its liquidity management operations. RBI’s printing costs also went up because of the move. Click here for enlarge Uncertain benefits The one big promise of demonetisation was a rapid expansion in the tax base but the actual results have been quite modest. According to the finance ministry’s estimates published in the latest Economic Survey, the tax base expansion attributable to demonetisation was Rs10,600 crore, lower than what RBI spent on interest expenses, and equivalent to only 0.1% of India’s gross domestic product (GDP). The full effect on tax collections “will materialize gradually” as reported income of new taxpayers grows, said the survey. How far such gains materialize remains to be seen. Another stated aim of demonetisation was to detect and eliminate counterfeit notes. The growth in detected counterfeit notes after demonetisation has not been unusually large, shows RBI data, even as counterfeits of the freshly issued notes have already emerged in the system. Demonetisation did provide a boost to non-cash payments in the short term but that effect may be waning, with the cash-to-GDP ratio back to double-digits. There seems to have been some impact on the stock of black money (rather than the flow), given that the construction sector has been hit hard. But this may also have led to large-scale job losses. The proportion of high-value notes (Rs500 and above)—often viewed as conduits of black money—has also been rising as new notes have entered the system. At the end of fiscal year 2017 (FY17), the proportion of high-value notes stood at 74%, considerably lower than that in FY16. But this figure may rise significantly by the end of FY18.
cluster 3
    Sentence 1 : India’s history with demonetisation: From 1946 to 2016 The whole country was taken aback when Prime Minister Narendra Modi on November 8 announced that the currencies in the denominations of Rs 500 and Rs 1,000 will be invalid post midnight. However, the lower denomination –Rs 10, Rs 20, Rs 50, Rs 100 and coins –will be valid. He further announced that new notes of Rs 500 and Rs 2,000 would introduce shortly. Thus, giving millions of Indians a panic attack. But what do you think was this the first time an Indian currency was banned of a sudden? Well, the answer is NO. A look into the past will make you realise that India is no new to demonetisation. Demonetisation has been implemented twice -1946 and 1978 – in the past. [Image: rs-1000_1938] Image Source The first currency ban: In 1946, the currency note of Rs 1,000 and Rs 10,000 were removed from circulation. The ban really did not have much impact, as the currency of such higher denomination was not accessible to the common people. However, both the notes were reintroduced in 1954 with an additional introduction of Rs 5,000 currency. Rs 500 and Rs 1000 notes were introduce in 1934 and after four years in 1938, Rs 10,000 notes were introduce. [Image: rs-5000_1978] Image Source The second: That came in 1978; the then Prime Minister of India Morarji Desai announced the currency ban taking Rs 1000, Rs 5000 and Rs 10,000 out of circulation. The sole aim of the ban was to curb black money generation in the country. Similarities in 1978 and 2016 ban: The note ban by Morarji Desai also aimed to drive away black money out of circulation in the economy. Hence, The High Denomination Bank Notes (Demonestisation) Act was implemented. Narendra Modi announced the currency ban is an address that was broadcasted across all news channels. Similarly, Desai announced the ban over the radio after which the banks were closed the following day. Both the affairs were kept confidential. Differences in the ban: Unlike Modi, Desai didn’t have the backing of the RBI Governor. The Governor I.G. Patel believed that the ban was implemented simply to immobilize the funds of the opposition party. Patel also believed that people never store black money in the form of currency for too long. It didn’t have much effect on the people and affected only the privilege few. While the recent ban had shaken the whole country. Coming back to 2016, there is also a buzz that smaller denomination currency notes like Rs 50 and Rs 100 will also be replaced by incorporating new features and design. And that reminds us of an incident dating back to early 70s, when there were rumours of withdrawing Rs 100 note from circulation, and immediately hoards of people were seen rushing to banks to exchange their Rs 10 and Rs 20 currencies.
cluster 4
    Sentence 1 : Three countries in three continents: After Modi’s India, demonetisation is spreading around the world Six weeks ago, when prime minister Narendra Modi announced his government’s decision to demonetise Rs500 and Rs1,000 notes, it wasn’t just Indians who were taken aback. World leaders, economists, and international organisations watched the bold experiment with a mix of wonder and worry. Would it work as a means to crack down on unaccounted cash and counterfeit currency? So far, Modi’s move has left millions scrambling for cash, hitting consumption and thereby threatening GDP growth in India. Nonetheless, it now appears Modi’s decision was just the first of a handful of such year-end demonetisation exercises around the world. Australia On Dec. 14, Australia’s financial services and revenue minister Kelly O’Dwyer said that the country is reviewing a move to ban its $100 notes, the highest denomination available, as well as potentially restricting cash transactions over a certain limit. Australia, much like India, wants to clamp down on the shadow economy. “Removing large denomination notes in Australia would be good for the economy and good for the banks,” UBS analysts said in a note last month. Pakistan On Dec. 19, Pakistan’s senate passed a resolution to phase out its Rs5,000 notes in an attempt to curtail black money. In value terms, Rs5,000 bills account for 30% of the currency in circulation in the country. Pakistan’s government plans to implement this demonetisation over the next three to five years, in contrast to India’s accelerated approach. The senator who put forward the motion, Osman Saifulla Khan, clarified that the government wasn’t in any way following India’s ideology, saying that he was the last person to be impressed by Modi, according to the Dawn newspaper. Much like India, Pakistan is on a mission to fight tax evasion and the stashing of illegal wealth. Venezuela On Dec. 11, Venezuela—whose inflation rate is estimated to touch 475% this year—announced that it has demonetised its most valuable note, the 100-bolivar bill. The Nicolás Maduro-led government gave citizens a 72-hour window before withdrawing the currency, which accounted for 77% of the nation’s cash in circulation. The government said old notes will be replaced, at some point, with new ones in denominations between 500 and 20,000 bolivars. The South American country believes that cross-border mafia has been buying Venezuelan bolivars and selling them for vast profits in Colombia. “We must keep beating the mafias,” Maduro said. However, the government was forced to give citizens an extended deadline for the use of the 100 bolivar bill after a serious shortage of currency led to violent protests and looting. Tough times In the past, countries such as Myanmar and Zimbabwe tried their luck with demonetisation with worrisome results. In India, the move is already drawing criticism, with several economists questioning the government’s execution of the policy and raising concerns about the lack of infrastructure for a cash-free future in an almost entirely cash-dependent nation. “The biggest problems with India’s demonetisation plans are that there is a lack of nation-wide internet coverage and a lack of planning,” said Lourdes Casanova, senior lecturer at Cornell University’s Johnson School of Management. “This is the first time a currency ban is happening in a country on such a large scale. Theoretically it looks good, but there are massive operational challenges that worry me.” Casanova added that there will be a drop of a “percentage point or two” in quarterly GDP growth and that annual growth would come down proportionately. And that may not bode well for Australia, Venezuela, and Pakistan.
cluster 5
    Sentence 1 : Indian Currency Demonetization: Advantages and Disadvantages The government of India recently took a bold step to demonetize Rs 500 and Rs 1000 currency, which means that the legal tender of currency units is declared invalid from the specified date. Demonetization of currency means discontinuity of the said currency from circulation and replacing it with a new currency. Most of the people hailed the Modi's strong decision, while poor were shocked by the move. The overnight decision changed the life of many as black money holders were worried about the pile of cash they were sitting on. Many poor daily wage workers were left with no job and income as owners were unable to pay their daily wage. It is no doubt a bold step taken by the government which will definitely help India to become corruption-free. Here are some advantages and disadvantages of de-monetization: [Image: Black Money tracking] Black Money tracking This move will help the government to track unaccounted black money or cash on which income tax has not been paid. Individuals who are sitting on a pile of cash usually do not deposit the amount in the bank or invest anywhere as they would be required to show income or submit PAN for any valid financial transactions. They would hide it somewhere and use it as and when necessary. Banning high-value currency will impact people who will have no option, but, to declare income and pay tax on the same or destroy the cash somehow. Now, it is not possible to hide the money as the notes have been declared invalid. [Image: Reduction in illegal activity] Reduction in illegal activity Banning high-value currency will halt illegal activity as the cash provided for such activities has no value now. Black money is usually used to fund the illegal activity, terrorism, and money laundering. Fake currency circulation will come to a halt in a single shot. Corrupt officers, money launderers are under threat as Income tax department is taking all the measures to track such people. [Image: Tax payment] Tax payment Most of the businessmen who have been hiding some income are ready to pay advance tax as current year's income. Tax payers who have been hiding some income can come forward to declare income and pay tax on the same. Individuals are required to submit PAN for any deposit above Rs 50,000 in cash, which will help tax department to track individuals with high denominations. Also, deposit up to Rs 2.5 lakh will not come under Income tax scrutiny. [Image: Jan Dhan Yojana] Jan Dhan Yojana Now individuals are depositing enough cash in their Jan Dhan accounts which they were reluctant to do so a few days back. The amount deposited can be used for the betterment of the country. [Image: Disadvantages of Currency Demonetization ] Disadvantages of Currency Demonetization It may cause inconvenience for initial few days for those who have to start running to the banks to exchange notes, deposit amount or withdraw the same. The situation can turn chaotic if there is a delay in the circulation of new currency. Individuals who have an upcoming wedding are the ones who have to make alternative arrangements to make payments. However, the government has given higher withdrawal limit in such cases. [Image: Cost of currency destruction] Cost of currency destruction After the news, we have seen that many individuals have burnt their cash and discarded the same, which is a loss to the economy. The government has to bear the cost of printing of new currency and its circulation. It makes sense when benefits of demonetization are higher. The cost of currency printing is a burden on the tax payers and is one of the many disadvantages of de-monetization. [Image: Conclusion ] Conclusion There are only advantages of demonetization in the long term. The government is taking all the necessary steps and actions to meet the currency demand and ensure the smooth flow of new currency. [Image: New notes now in circulation] New notes now in circulation We now have new notes in circulation with denomination of Rs 2,000 for the very first time. There are also new Rs 500 notes in circulation, which are very thin and have great security features. So, now there is whole lot of new currency that is in circulation. There are also plans to include new currency in other smaller denominations, especially Rs 100. In any case, nobody seems to be unduly worried now that the entire demonetization episode and the time frame to exchange the old notes now stands completed. RBI on demonetization The government had announced demonetization of Rs 1000 and Rs 500 note on November 8, 2016. A demonetization is a tool useful for eradication of black money. After demonetization of Rs 1000 and Rs 500, the government introduced new Rs 500 but not Rs 1000. Instead of Rs 1000, the new Rs 2000 introduced not only these the RBI printed new RS 200 notes. Many now argue that the process of demonetization had little impact on balck money, given that 99 per cent of the notes were surrendered back to the bank. The cash ban had forced the RBI to print new notes and in new denominations.
    Sentence 2 : Demonetization DEFINITION of 'Demonetization' Demonetization is the act of stripping a currency unit of its status as legal tender. It occurs whenever there is a change of national currency: The current form or forms of money is pulled from circulation and retired, often to be replaced with new notes or coins. Sometimes, a country completely replaces the old currency with new currency. The opposite of demonetization is remonetization, in which a form of payment is restored as legal tender. BREAKING DOWN 'Demonetization' There are multiple reasons why nations demonetize their local units of currency: to combat inflation to combat corruption and crime (counterfeiting, tax evasion) to discourage a cash-dependent economy to facilitate trade Dramatic Examples of Demonetization The Coinage Act of 1873 demonetized silver as the legal tender of the United States, in favor of fully adopting the gold standard. Several coins, including two-cent piece, three-cent piece, and half dime were discontinued. The withdrawal of silver from the economy resulted in a contraction of the money supply, which subsequently led to a five-year economic depression throughout the country. In response to the dire situation and pressure from farmers and silver miners and refiners, the Bland-Allison Act remonetized silver as legal tender in 1878. An example of demonetization for trade purposes occurred when the nations of the European Union officially began to use the euro as their everyday currencies in 2002. When the physical euro bills and coins were introduced, the old national currencies, such as the German mark, the French franc and the Italian lira were demonetized. However, these varied currencies remained convertible into Euros at fixed exchange rates for a while to assure a smooth transition. In 2015, the Zimbabwean government demonetized its dollar as a way to combat the country’s hyperinflation, which was recorded at 231,000,000%. The three-month process involved expunging the Zimbabwean dollar from the country’s financial system and solidifying the U.S. dollar, the Botswana pula and the South African rand as the country’s legal tender in a bid to stabilize the economy. India's Demonetization In 2016, the Indian government decided to demonetize the 500- and 1000- rupee notes, the two biggest denominations in its currency system; these notes accounted for 86% of the country’s circulating cash. With little warning, India's Prime Minister Narendra Modi announced to the citizenry on Nov. 8 that those notes were worthless, effective immediately – and they had until the end of the year to deposit or exchange them for newly introduced 2000 rupee and 500 rupee bills. Chaos ensued in the cash-dependent economy (some 78% of all Indian customer transactions are in cash), as long, snaking lines formed outside ATMs and banks, which had to shut down for a day. The new rupee notes have different specifications, including size and thickness, requiring re-calibration of ATMs: only 60% of the country’s 200,000 ATMs were operational. Even those dispensing bills of lower denominations faced shortages. The government’s restriction on daily withdrawal amounts added to the misery, though a waiver on transaction fees did help a bit. Small businesses and households struggled to find cash and reports of daily wage workers not receiving their dues surfaced. The rupee fell sharply against the dollar. The government’s goal (and rationale for the abrupt announcement) was to combat India's thriving underground economy on several fronts: eradicate counterfeit currency, fight tax evasion (only 1% of the population pays taxes), eliminate black money gotten from money laundering and terrorist-financing activities, and to promote a cashless economy. Individuals and entities with huge sums of black money gotten from parallel cash systems were forced to take their large-denomination notes to a bank, which was by law required to acquire tax information on them. If the owner could not provide proof of making any tax payments on the cash, a penalty of 200% of the owed amount was imposed. Alternative Funds Soon after the announcement, people rushed to buy gold, a demand that drove prices up, in some cases even to a 60% premium, prompting the tax authorities to conduct surveys, according to the Business Standard newspaper. The government emphasized the need to furnish PAN (Indian Permanent Account Number) card details on purchases for accountability purposes, and many jewelry shops that were flouting the norms came under crackdowns. Simultaneously, rumors of a gold ban started to float, which led to agencies ramping up the volume of gold imports – to around 100 metric tons during November, the highest since 2015, as reported by Reuters. Many Indians switched to alternative payment avenues – a big deal in a country of 1.2 billion with only 25.9 million credit cards and 697 million ATM cards as of July 2016. The biggest gainers were mobile wallet companies that offer ease of transactions through a large network of partners. Alibaba (NYSE:BABA)-backed Paytm saw a sevenfold increase in overall traffic and a 10-fold jump in money added to Paytm accounts. It also saw the number of transactions double to five million a day. App downloads for Paytm increased by 300%. Paytm rival MobiKwik also saw its app downloads quadruple and a 20-fold increase in money added to the wallets, MobiKwik Founder & CEO Bipin Preet Singh, told CNBC-TV18 on November 13. Prepaid cash cards were another option that customers found useful, and that meant good news for companies like ItzCash. Other alternatives include mobile payments systems linked to e-commerce businesses like Ola Money, FreeCharge, Flipkart Wallet. Ola Money, the payment portal for popular transportation app Ola Cabs, reported a 1500% jump in money added to the accounts in less than four hours. Interest in Bitcoin also spiked: Sandeep Geonka, co-founder of Zebpay, told Investopedia that his bitcoin exchange was now adding about 50,000 new users per month. "We are seeing an increased demand for bitcoin and India clearly has shortage of supply, making the demand and lack of liquidity push up prices of bitcoin as compared to global exchanges,” said Coinsecure CEO Mohit Kalra. The virtual currency was trading at INR 55,735 in India in November (about $836), compared INR 47,725 (about $712) (Coindesk) elsewhere. Long-Term Effects Over 3 trillion rupees, or over $44 billion in old currency, was deposited with Indian banks in just the first week after the demonetization. There was concern that the uncertainty and short-term liquidity squeeze would take some momentum off the Indian economy, the fastest-growing in the world; in particular, sectors like real estate, notorious as a harbor for cash dealings and black money, were expected to take a hit, with "luxury property prices dipping by as much as 25-30%," said Ashwinder Raj Singh, CEO of Residential Services, JLL India. But experts believed any slowdown would only be short-lived once the systems adjusted to the new normal, especially if the government heeded calls to lower interest rates by groups like the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI). Credit rating agency India Ratings & Research maintained its GDP growth forecast for India at 7.8% for FY17, albeit with a downward bias.
    Sentence 3 : What are the impacts of Demonetisation on Indian Economy Demonetization is a generations’ memorable experience and is going to be one of the economic events of our time. Its impact is felt by every Indian citizen. Demonetization affects the economy through the liquidity side. Its effect will be a telling one because nearly 86% of currency value in circulation was withdrawn without replacing bulk of it. As a result of the withdrawal of Rs 500 and Rs 1000 notes, there occurred huge gap in the currency composition as after Rs 100; Rs 2000 is the only denomination. Absence of intermediate denominations like Rs 500 and Rs 1000 will reduce the utility of Rs 2000. Effectively, this will make Rs 2000 less useful as a transaction currency though it can be a store value denomination. Demonetization technically is a liquidity shock; a sudden stop in terms of currency availability. It creates a situation where lack of currencies jams consumption, investment, production, employment etc. In this context, the exercise may produce following short term/long term/, consumption/investment, welfare/growth impacts on Indian economy. The intensity of demonetization effects clearly depends upon the duration of the liquidity shocks. Following are the main impacts. Demonetization is not a big disaster like global banking sector crisis of 2007; but at the same time, it will act as a liquidity shock that disturbs economic activities. Liquidity crunch (short term effect): liquidity shock means people are not able to get sufficient volume of popular denomination especially Rs 500. This currency unit is the favourable denomination in daily life. It constituted to nearly 49% of the previous currency supply in terms of value. Higher the time required to resupply Rs 500 notes, higher will be the duration of the liquidity crunch. Current reports indicate that all security printing press can print only 2000 million units of RS 500 notes by the end of this year. Nearly 16000 mn Rs 500 notes were in circulation as on end March 2016. Some portion of this were filled by the new Rs 2000 notes. Towards end of March approximately 10000 mn units will be printed and replaced. All these indicate that currency crunch will be in our economy for the next four months. Welfare loss for the currency using population: Most active segments of the population who constitute the ‘base of the pyramid’ uses currency to meet their transactions. The daily wage earners, other labourers, small traders etc. who reside out of the formal economy uses cash frequently. These sections will lose income in the absence of liquid cash. Cash stringency will compel firms to reduce labour cost and thus reduces income to the poor working class. There will be a trickle up effect of the liquidity chaos to the higher income people with time. 4. Consumption will be hit: When liquidity shortage strikes, it is consumption that is going to be adversely affected first. Consumption ↓→ Production ↓→ Employment ↓→ Growth ↓→ Tax revenue ↓ 5. Loss of Growth momentum– India risks its position of being the fastest growing largest economy: reduced consumption, income, investment etc. may reduce India’s GDP growth as the liquidity impact itself may last three -four months. 6. Impact on bank deposits and interest rate: Deposit in the short term may rise, but in the long term, its effect will come down. The savings with the banks are actually liquid cash people stored. It is difficult to assume that such ready cash once stored in their hands will be put into savings for a long term. They saved this money into banks just to convert the old notes into new notes. These are not voluntary savings aimed to get interest. It will be converted into active liquidity by the savers when full-fledged new currency supply take place. This means that new savings with banks is only transitory or short-term deposit. It may be encashed by the savers at the appropriate time. It is not necessary that demonetization will produce big savings in the banking system in the medium term. Most of the savings are obtained by biggie public sector banks like the SBI. They may reduce interest rate in the short/medium term. But they can’t follow it in the long term. 7. Impact on black money: Only a small portion of black money is actually stored in the form of cash. Usually, black income is kept in the form of physical assets like gold, land, buildings etc. Hence the amount of black money countered by demonetization depend upon the amount of black money held in the form of cash and it will be smaller than expected. But more than anything else, demonetization has a big propaganda effect. People are now much convinced about the need to fight black income. such a nationwide awareness and urge will encourage government to come out with even strong measures. 8. Impact on counterfeit currency: the real impact will be on counterfeit/fake currency as its circulation will be checked after this exercise. Demonetization as a cleaning exercise may produce several good things in the economy. At the same time, it creates unavoidable income and welfare losses to the poor sections of the society who gets income based on their daily work and those who doesn’t have the digital transaction culture. Overall economic activies will be dampened in the short term. But the unmeasurable benefits of having more transparency and reduced volume of black money activities can be pointed as long term benefits.
    Sentence 4 : 1.5 Million Jobs Lost, GDP At A Low: The State Of The Indian Economy After Demonetisation Demonetisation is going to be a landmark in the history of the Indian economy. It was an experience which might create fear in the minds of the people who indulge in illegal activities like tax evasion or money laundering of any kind. On November 8, 2016, the Indian government declared that the 500 and 1000 rupee notes will be stripped of their status as legal tender effective from midnight. These notes accounted for 86 percent of the country’s cash supply by value. Citizens were given time till December 31, 2016 to deposit their old currency notes and exchange them for the new currency notes of rupee 500 and 2000. The government’s aim was to root out counterfeit currency, fight tax evasion, curb inflation, eliminate black money and terror-funding, and to promote a cashless economy. When a currency note of a particular denomination ceases to be a legal tender, it is termed as demonetisation. Legal tender refers to money which can be legally used to make payments of debts or other obligations. A creditor is obliged by law to receive such money in payment of due debt to him. The term demonetisation is not new to the Indian economy. The highest denomination note ever printed by the Reserve Bank of India was the 10,000 rupee note in 1938 and again in 1954. It was demonetised first in 1946 and then in 1978. Since not many people had access to such notes at the time, this did not have a big impact on the country. The latest round of demonetisation has undoubtedly affected the common public and bankers. It has had many short term effects which are visible. The long term effects are yet to be experienced and felt. Impact Of Demonetisation On The Indian Economy On Gross Domestic Product (GDP): The Indian economy is a cash-driven economy and demonetisation has largely affected its growth. The GDP growth rate of 8.01% in 2015-2016 fell to 7.11% in 2016-2017 after demonetisation. This was largely due to less availability of cash in cash-intensive industries like manufacturing and construction. It has also adversely impacted the primary function of banks to issue loans and has put pressure on them as current account holders demand0 large sums of cash. On Daily Wage Workers: A major portion of the Indian workforce is a part of the informal economy. They use cash to meet all their expenses and demonetisation has resulted in a lot of them losing their jobs due to unavailability of cash. According to CMIE’s Consumer Pyramids Household Surveys (CPHS), approximately 1.5 million jobs were lost during the final quarter of the financial year 2016-17. The estimated employment during this period was 405 million as compared to 406.5 million during the previous four months. On Small Scale Industries:Businesses like the textile industry, salons, restaurants, and seasonal businesses are low capital enterprises and work on the basis of liquidity preference. Demonetisation gravely impacted their revenue collection and threatened their existence to an extent. On Black Money: Though only a small portion of black money is stored in the form of cash and majority is in the form of physical assets like gold, land, and building, demonetisation of the rupee 500 and 1000 notes might take out a lot of black money from the economy. On the General Economic Situation: Till months after demonetisation the general economic situation was disturbed. The public had to queue up outside banks to exchange their old currency for new ones. Households lacked liquidity and could not do transactions for daily items. Small shopkeepers who only accepted cash went into losses and some even shut down. On Inflation: The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) considers the Wholesale price index (WPI) and the Consumer Price Index (CPI) to measure inflation. Demonetisation is expected to reduce inflation as consumers have cut down on spending and aggregate demand has considerably fallen. According to government press releases, the official WPI for ‘All Commodities’ (Base: 2004-05=100) for the month of December, 2016 declined by 0.2 percent to 182.8 (provisional) from 183.1 (provisional) for the previous month. The index started rising during the month of January and rose by 1.0 percent to 184.6 (provisional) from 182.8 (provisional) for the previous month. This may be correlated with the availability of cash with people which led to increased spending. On Terror Funding: Demonetisation was aimed as a clean-up of the economy where Fake Indian Currency Notes (FICN) would be checked. It is aimed at rendering all fake notes of rupees 500 and 1000 useless and thus drastically affecting illegal funding of terror groups in Jammu and Kashmir, states in the North-East, and Naxalism-influenced states. On Political Parties: Many Political Parties use large amounts of undeclared cash to campaign for elections and meet other requirements. Due to Demonetisation such acts might get restricted to an extent and parties will have to formulate new strategies. Towards a Digital Economy: Absence of liquid cash has led to people making transactions using cheques or account transfers. They have also switched to virtual wallets like Paytm which allows electronic transfer of money. All this might result in a digital economy where transactions are being recorded and the economy has more white money. This might increase the government’s tax revenue. Quantitative Analysis Of The Impact Of Demonetisation On The Indian Economy As per the data published in hand book of statistics on Indian Economy by RBI, GDP at Market price fell approximately by 1 percent as compared to previous financial year. It registered a growth of 7.11 % from previous year as compared to the 8.01% growth witnessed during 2015-16. Table 1 indicates that GDP lost its growth streak of 4 years in the financial year 2016-17. GDP growth rate increased from 5.46% in 2012-13 to 8.01% in the year 2015-16. As per the estimates of the Central Statistics Office, all the sectors of the economy faced different situations in Q1 of the financial year 2017-18. According to these estimates, the GVA at constant prices in Q1 of 2017-18 was rupees 2904128 crores as compared to rupees 2751407 crores in the Q1 of the previous financial year. This shows a decline in growth from 7.6% in 2016-17 to 5.6% in 2017-18 (see table 2) Sectors in the economy such as Construction, Agriculture, Forestry & Fishing which employ a large number of daily wage workers and have liquidity preference witnessed a decline in growth. Agriculture grew by 2.3% in Q1 of 2017-18 as compared to 2.5% in Q1 of 2016-17, Construction grew at a rate of 2.3% in Q1 of 2017-18 and witnessed a drop of 0.2% since the Q1 of 2016-17. Manufacturing, which is the most important indicator of economic growth and employment has grown at a very slow rate post demonetisation. It grew by only 1.2% in Q1 of 2017-18 as compared to a massive growth of 10.7% in Q1 of 2016-17. Conclusion Demonetisation has been praised as well as criticised on various grounds. There has been a lot of opposition regarding the implementation of this policy. In the short run, there have been problems related to liquidity crunch, unemployment, loss of growth momentum, and a temporary halt to major economic activities. All this is evident from the data provided by the RBI. The long term effects of Demonetisation are yet to be ascertained. It is expected that it can improve the Indian economy in the long run by increasing tax compliance, financial inclusion, consequently improving the state of the economy. It can boost the GDP by increasing the availability of funds for lending and also by reducing transaction costs if the economy moves to digital modes of payments.
    Sentence 5 : Positive and Negative effects of demonization of ₹500/1000 notes on Indian economy Now this is the mother of all headlines. PM Modi has just addressed the Country and announced that Rs 500 and Rs 1000 notes will be ceased to legal tender from the midnight ( 8 Nov, 2016). It means, these notes will not be accepted in legal transactions. Black money holders baldly busted. Nature of repel in the water is, it spreads in both the direction. It is a law of nature. In the same way, every action has both negative and positive aspects. But its upto us to decide what is more important. Human brain is more creative in focusing on negative aspects at first. Its not bad as it keeps us alert for the possible adverse conditions. So let us discuss the negative effects first. Negative Effects As government has announced it in a hastiness, it may effect its execution. Allow withdrawal from ATM is upto Rs. 2500 and from bank its Rs 10000 only. Long queues will not allow a person to get money on time. It will be a little difficult for a family person to survive with this amount. The Average Population per Bank Branch (APBB) as on 31.3.2013 stands at 12,100 (source). Government has given us 50 days to deposit all our cash money into our bank accounts. Lets say 40 days are working out of 50. It means, on banks have to deal with average of 300 people daily. Yes, I agree that this number includes every living human being (children, senior citizens, women), so you can say that this number will reduce on practical scale. But wait, what about people who will come along? What about people who will come repeatedly, or I can say, daily? What about people who have to come again due to closing time or any other reason? This number will surely exceed. Believe me, public dealing is a very tough job and when you have 300 hassled brains in front of you, it becomes horrible. Running out of Money: Though, everyone needs new currency notes, it is very hard to provide cash on time, even by RBI. Because, there is a limit on printing currency notes. Government just can’t order RBI to print new notes as per requirement. There is a regulatory system which guides RBI and Indian government how much new currency notes should be printed other country has to face some serious issues like, inflation. So, government will not be able to provide enough money to banks to pass on to consumers. It will create uncertainty. Empty ATM’s: Same as bank branches, queues on ATM’s will also have to face same fate. Standing in long queues and returning with nothing will not please anyone. Patients: Government hospitals have been allowed to accept old Rs 500 and Rs 1000 notes. According to National Family Health Survey-3, the private medical sector remains the primary source of health care for 70% of households in urban areas and 63% of households in rural areas. So its easy to understand that what will be the effects on these 63% and 70% patients. White Into Black: As Indian, we do believe in cash. Even if our money is purely white, we go to bank, withdraw some money and go for shopping. Cheques and ATM swipes are not available everywhere. Like, if someone in family is hospitalized or, have marriage in house, we do withdraw our cash and feel comfortable. So, whatever the reason is, if someone has withdrawn a decent amount from his account then it will create a huge problem for him to prove himself innocent. So, in this case, instead of converting black money into white, a person has accidentally converted his white money into black. Patience of People: Considering all of the above points (and many more in the line), it will need a superman effort from a common man to keep his patience in balance. Any outburst in the tolerance of people will make the situation more terrible. Though, for now, people are more in favor of respected PM because right now they are not suffers. But when they will face hurdles in their routine jobs due to shortage of money then it will be their patience which will make this historic move a success story. Downfall in Economy: Though, it will be a very temporary effect, but for the next few months, there will be a visible effect on economy due to the decreased purchased capacity of consumers. Worst effects will be on startups and medium sized companies and firms. Positive Effects Foreign Trust: Transparency is always welcomed, specially in business. It is the most important gradient for foreign investors. Everyone like to have their money in safe hands. Black money is a major factor in India which inhibits the rapid growth in private sector. When a company decides to invest in a product they can calculate almost every kind of expenditure they will have to face except bribe. Ratan Tata has shown his irritation about corruption and bribe many times. So decreased black money will surely help Indian government to gain trust from foreign investors. Lubrication in Circulation: Money is the lubrication that makes the market economy possible. A large portion of this lubricant was immobilized in the form of black money. Rs 500 and Rs 1000 shares a major part. Due to this immobilization government is bound to circulate more currency notes in the market to keep it running. In simple terms, say, government gives you 100 potatoes to distribute in the market. Instead of distributing all, you circulate only 80 pieces. Rest you preserve for your own benefits. Now for the fulfilment of the requirement, government will provide you 20 more potatoes, out of them you circulate only 16 and this keeps going on. Government have to invest more to fulfill the need and you will eat more as compare to others. Here, ‘you’ refers to market. This cause inflation. Now imagine, somehow government raids on you and liberates all the stored stock of potatoes. Surely stock will be huge which will help government to fulfill the need without any expense. It can distribute the extra potatoes to those who require the most. Now, replace potatoes by money and imagine the outcomes. Hard Money to Digital Money: Though, it is the first of its kind, but we may have to face these surgical strikes on black money in the future too. This will give some time to people to understand the need of digital money in the current era. We have seen some inspiring pictures where vegetable seller is accepting money via PayTm. India is changing. New Hope: Black money was a key agenda for BJP during election campaigns. But people were disappointed when there was no major step taken by the current government. Now when PM Modi has declared the demonetization of Rs 500 and Rs 1000 notes, a positive vibe has been spread through out the country. Zero Counterfeit Notes: In India, the circulation of fake Indian currency notes (FICN) has been on the rise, according to the Reserve Bank of India’s (RBI) annual reports. The year 2014-2015 saw a steep rise, with 594,446 FICN detected, up from 488,273 in the year 2013-14. When it comes to the type of notes counterfeited in 2014-15, RBI data showed that counterfeited Rs 500 notes were most common, with 273,923 recorded. Rs 100 and Rs 1000 notes were the second and third most counterfeited bills, respectively (source). Most of the FICN are printed in Pakistan. Major transit points include India’s neighboring countries Nepal and Bangladesh. Other transit routes includes Dubai, Thailand, Malaysia, Sri Lanka and China (source). Now all this FICN is equal to ZERO. Rein on Terrorism: The ISI has been making a profit of 30-40% on the face value of each counterfeit Indian note produced in Pakistan, according to the report. The cost of printing a Rs 1,000 counterfeit note, for instance, is Rs 39 (the RBI spends Rs 29 to print a Rs 1,000 note), but it is sold at Rs 350-400, according to the report. It is a measure source of funding for these terrorist groups. Now all these funding will be equal to ZERO. Increased Income Tax Revenue: It would be an exaggeration to say that all black money holders will deposit all of their stored cash into bank accounts. But they will also not let their hard-earned cash to become worthless paper. And whatever they will do it will convert their black money into white, at least for once. Someone is surely going to pay income tax on that amount. It will drastically increase the revenue generated from tax. Deflation: Deflation refers to situation, where there is decline in general price levels. It increases the real value of money and allows one to buy more goods with the same amount of money over time. All of the above mentioned points will lead to the decrease in inflation which will automatically increase deflation rate. Goods will be cheaper and facilities will be in the range of poor people. Here is an example. If we somehow try to manage short-term discomfort which we all are going to face in the coming days then positive aspects are really great to consider. Everything is fair in love and war. Its a war against Corruption and love for our Country. Do you think PM Modi's decision will help end Black Money? There is a public poll on discontinuing Rs. 500, 1000 Notes. The poll just has one question and takes only a couple of seconds to complete. Please let people know your response on this step.
    Sentence 6 : Demonetization In India: A Boon Or A Bane For The Common Man It came as a surprise to everybody after our PM Narendra Modi declared on trashing the 500 and 1000 rupees notes. PM’s move on banning the respective notes certainly may be the ray of hope to sweep out corruption and a boon to every tax-payer. The attempt to wipe out black money and corruption might be rigid, however was it really a well-planned move? Most of them had this question in mind as they were unaware of the reason behind such a drastic change. Usually skeptical to changes is typical among Indians. However, let me point out few reasons which were the positive part of this decision was1) To stop the funds that were transferred by terrorists, 2) Put an end to the circulation of fake currency notes, 3) Wiping off the corruption of black money 4) Bring up the indian economy for a better tomorrow including real-estate and gold where most black money were grounded 5) Digitalization being the forte (pic: feegenie) Digitalizing India to have a cashless policy where every Indian would either use online transactions or swipe their card for the smallest of uses. This will help in maintaining harmony and discipline among people and the crocodiles out there to fill the country with filth would step back from corruption. Although the Constitution has many loopholes, which in turn could backfire this attempt, as we have other ruling parties that may unite to stand against the good cause as it involves the government. The government did not pay heed to the fact that they may not be in power by the next elections, still took a step towards a better tomorrow. (pic: The New Indian Express) Aiming at combating corruption or black money, short-term problems and chaos spread among the working class; especially those that deal with cash on a daily basis. During this change, most of the working class people had to stand in queues to withdraw a basic minimum amount of cash from banks or ATMs, where many small businesses run on liquid cash. The effect on urban consumers, small and large businesses will be prominent as this move will seem to be crippling down in the sort-term. The semi-urban and rural sections will take more time than urban areas to cope up with the change, however the shortage of smaller denominator notes will create more chaos. People with stationery shops, daily wagers, auto-drivers, small businesses that involve services providers like electricians, plumbers, upholsters, handyman, even online e-commerce companies that do not have online payment facilities had to capitulate to the situation. After a point, other denominations which are less than 2000 and 500 notes will get impacted and there would be requirement for smaller currencies in the next few weeks. The incurred loss during these days cannot be mended or attained by them. (pic: BGR) Assuming the attempt to clear out corruption wasn’t a planned process, the brunt that the common people have been facing since that night was not justified either. The chaos alerted common man driven towards a negative thought-process which led them to fear lack of cash in hand, as this would affect them while travelling, purchasing necessities and other emergency requirements. The initial turmoil to any huge change can be adjusted however, when common man being effected for an unexplained period of time makes them anxious and weary about the situation. Infact many government hospitals and medicine stores refrained from accepting 500 and 1000 rupees notes which was not as per the declaration by PM. Most private entities and organisation neither compromised nor came as a help to common citizens during this crisis, as they were afraid of being penalised by the government. (pic: change.org) Standing behind long queues in the bank each day to withdraw nominal amount which is insufficient however, lately the weekly withdrawal was increased to soothe the civilians from unrest for the time being. Although this effect did not hamper the rich as most of their transactions were online, nonetheless the working class faced the brunt and are still going through the same. (pic: local press co.) The controversy of introducing Rs.2000 note coined several doubts on the government as to what could the strategy be? Moreover seemed like an unsolved mystery. Although this demonetising step has the potential to pin down the small rogues, scrape off the illegal transactions in real estate, gold and other sectors where circulation of unaccounted money was vigorous. Mostly the daily wagers, cash related businesses and services were under a huge loss and had succumbed to the currency crunch. There wouldn’t have been shortage of cash in banks and ATMs (the new 2000 and 500 notes) and people who belong to working class would not have been the victims of the crisis if the idea to demonetise would have been more planned. Plus, the primary focus should be on recovering the safeguarded money of people kept in the overseas. (pic: local press co.) (pic: hiimpact) A lot of corruption came into notice which can be called as the demonetising effect. Various unaccounted money in the form of real-estate and gold were discovered from certain section of people. True though that the act could be a start of a new economy for India. The utmost that indian citizens can give away during this crisis is patience as they work hard, pays tax and compromises to anything that could be good for the country. Hoping to see the world of digitalization strike in India and making the people aware of benefits of transacting digitally.
    Sentence 7 : Demonetization Anniversary: Decoding the Effects of Indian Currency Notes Ban As the clock struck 8 pm on November 8, 2016, India came to a standstill and Prime Minister Narendra Modi announced one of the most ground breaking changes in the Indian economy. The Indian Prime Minister announced his plans of banning Rs 500 and Rs 1000 notes with several motives in mind and thus began India’s struggle with demonetization. A year after the country was wiped out of old currency, the effects of Narendra Modi’s demonetization can still be felt in the economy. Demonetization has been one of the most criticized moves by PM Modi and everyone from former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh to former RBI Governor Raghuram Rajan has condemned this move and its effects on the Indian economy. From slowing down the economic growth in various sectors to giving people nightmares of the long queues and the inability to spend liquid cash freely, the hullabaloo created by demonetization is remembered by one and all on its first anniversary. Demonetization began as a way to curb the black money from our economy was later addressed as a means of making India cashless and giving digital India a boost. Demonetization was initiated with a wide array of motives like stripping the Indian economy of its black money, push people to pay taxes for the unaccounted pile of cash, curb terrorism, promote the digital India movement and make India a cashless economy. Demonetization and Personal Finance Piggybanks have been transformed to savings accounts as people turn towards increasing bank balances instead of stashing emergency cash in different corners of the house. People finally began to trust the digital payment systems; because that was the only option they were left with. Demonetization proved that Indians can strive and adapt to any changes and made people financially aware about the different spending options. The government’s efforts to revamp the currency system provided people with a boost to use the cash that was lying around and invest it in a more productive way. The more native and conservative people also opened up towards the era of plastic cash and made several Indians tech friendly. Demonetization and Black Money One of the most important points that pushed people to support demonetization was its associating with bringing an end to the black money problem in India. However, almost 99% of the money was deposited back to RBI. The statistics revealed that either the hoarders found a way to legitimize their black money or did not hold them in the form of cash. But this was known by many before the RBI reports as well. Black money hoarders do not hold the money in cash according to several finance experts and when this point was highlighted time and again, other important effects of demonetization were publicized by the government, like the role of demonetization on curbing terrorism. Demonetization and Terror Funding The second reason to support demonetization was its role in curbing terrorism by increasing the obstacles in terror funding. Terrorist organization were known to use fake Indian currency notes for funding their projects and the government believed that this could be contained with the help of demonetization. The Income Tax department seized Rs. 474.37 crore in new and old currency from November 9, 2016 to January 4, 2017 (the demonetization period). However, there are no reports if the money seized had any association with terror funding. In spite of these numbers, there is no doubting that the cash reserves of several terror groups were severely hit in the early days of demonetization. Demonetization and Digital India Pushing India towards becoming a cashless economy was another reason that demonetization was publicized for. People turned towards digital transactions for everything from buying groceries from a road side vendor to paying utility bills during the time of demonetization. However, as the flow of cash into the economy began to increase, the use of these apps and digital wallets saw a slide once again. Demonetization and Tax Payments Pushing Indians to deposit and account the cash lying in their house also meant a rise in the tax payments for the country. According to government reports the income tax payers saw a record increase in the post demonetization era. 9.1 million New taxpayers were added to the slab which was an 80% rise over the typical yearly rise. This increase in the number of taxpaying citizens in the country has been credited to demonetization. This increase was also resonated in IT returns filing and advance tax payment. Demonetization and GDP The ban on old notes is being cited as one of the key contributors to the economic slowdown. With the gross domestic product (GDP) for the April-June quarter slipping to 5.7%, the reality of the economic slowdown could not be ignored. The World Bank has reduced the India GDP growth forecast to 7% for 2017-18 owing to demonetization and GST (Goods and Service tax). The slowdown is being cited as a delayed consequence of demonetization by the World Bank and while there are various other reasons at play, the steep decline has been credited to be an effect of demonetization. Demonetization and MSMEs Demonetization had a lasting effect on Indians MSMEs (Medium, Small and Micro Enterprises). Various medium and small enterprises turned towards digitalization, however, the micro industries were affected by the worst of its wrath. The micro industry owners were not a part of the black economy and they were clearly unprepared for the effects of demonetization. Many micro industry workers returned back to villages and the growth rate of these companies went as low as 1%. The MSME sector has been recovering from the drastic changes and its impact on the revenue, but demonetization forced the MSME sector to be friendlier and more accommodating towards the digital arenas and made them more accommodating towards change. While these are some of the effects of demonetization on the national and economic front, demonetization gave individuals several lessons that have changed the way we look at managing finances. Demonetization made sure that we monetize our earnings to get the best returns possible whether it is by turning to monthly investment schemes to save better or by turning our safe cash pile into an easy withdrawal FD (fixed deposit). The government’s revenue will see an increase because of demonetization and its initial effects are already prevalent in the income tax filings post note ban. Demonetization has played a crucial role in bringing digitalization and financial planning into the forefront for many. India has withstood the immediate chaotic impacts of demonetization and it is evident that the returns of the hardships will begin to show in the coming months.
    Sentence 8 : What will be the positive and negative effects of demonization of ₹500/1000 notes on Indian economy? Narendra Modi government, in what many are calling a “ Surgical Strike on Black Money”, has made the Rupees 500 and 1000 currency notes (currently in circulation) as invalid or null after midnight of 8th November. Positives of this bold and unprecedented move are aplenty but let me try to play the Devil’s Advocate just to see the flip-side of the story (and also to answer the question): Inconvenience to Poor people: Most of the rural and urban poor in India are un-banked i.e. they don’t have bank accounts. (Precisely this the reason the Jan Dhan Scheme to open Bank accounts was launched, now we can see the other purpose of the scheme). These people- the migrant labourers, the landless workers, the potters, the contract labourers, the street vendors, rickshaw pullers,female workers keep the money stashed at their homes. Their life savings are in cash amount. They will face an uphill challenge to get the money converted into currency notes of valid denominations. They are not connected to banks or any formal channel of banking. No Identity proof may may be available which are required for exchanges above Rs 4000. It is even possible that there is no bank or post office nearby. Most of them will be afraid to go to banks and be nervous at this stage. They will have to spare a day’s work to go for re-encashment, hence loss of work. They may even face harassment at the hands of Bank officials to get the money exchanged. They may even have to pay bribes. 2. The Disadvantaged lot: Old people, disabled, sick, transgenders and prostitutes will be especially impacted. The above category of people will be deeply inconvenienced to go to banks to exchange their money. The transgenders and prostitutes keep all of their money in cash with themselves. Due to the inherent bias of the society they may choose not to go to banks themselves instead hire a middleman for this purpose who will not only charge for fees for their services and but also cheat a large amount. 3. Emergency Situations: People who need money for some urgent work like to see a doctor, pay hospital charges, medical emergency, travelling etc will be in a highly difficult situation as no one will accept their money (even if they have it) if in denominations of Rs 500 or 1000 notes. The ATMs and banks closed for two days, hence they will have no other resort (except of net-banking). Although the government has made provisions to minimize the inconvenience of these people- upto next 72 hours these notes will be accepted at Government agencies. But it may not suffice in majority of situations: in case of emergency, for example, one cannot choose to go to government hospital. 4. Impact on Households: It is an Indian thing in villages and small towns for housewives to keep their saved cash hidden away from their husbands and other family members. Invalidation of Rs 500 and 100o notes will jeopardize this scheme. Households with liquor problems will provide the husbands to seize control of the hidden cash. Also, general day to day purchase may be impacted due to lack of cash in hand. 5. Impact on Agriculture: The months of November and December are the season for sowing of Rabi crops (in most of India) and Samba crops in Tamil Nadu. This season requires a lot of cash in hand for purchasing seeds, pesticides, fertilizers, hiring labourers etc. All these activities will be severely hampered due to want of required cash. 6. The informal sector: Contract laborers in organised and un-organised sectors are paid their daily-wages in cash. Now the contractors can delay the wage payment for few days till things settle down. These laborers will have to face hardships for comings days since they live a life on hand to mouth earnings. 7. Gold: Now since the black money stored in cash gone in one shot, the corrupt may start saving their black money in some other easy investment to avoid any loss in future and the easiest option might be keeping them in gold and silver so that they can be en-cashed with ease in future. This may lead to increase in gold imports in long run. 8. Indian Economy: Most of the business in India has cash transaction with less than 2% business transactions taking place electronically. This move will cause severe cash crunch for both the customers and the sellers. Hence slow down the business in coming weeks. The small artisans and street vendors will be most impacted. The fast growing e-commerce segment which was made popular due to COD (Cash on Delivery) model will have slow business for few weeks. 9. Foreign travelers: Tourists in India will have to queue in banks to get the notes changed. Also, Indians who are on foreign visits may not be able to come back to India immediately, hence locking their money. 10 . Privacy may be lost: The financial situation (privacy) of families who store money in cash may be exposed to gaze of others, in the process of money exchange at banks risking their life situations For example: may lead to extortion and kidnapping in poor law and order districts. 11. Panic and awareness: There will be a panic like situation for many cash holders due to lack of awareness. Big rush conditions in banks and post offices may disrupt the other regular services of Banks and Post Offices like loan disbursal, postal services etc as most of the manpower will be utilized for this note exchange activity in the upcoming weeks. There can be many cases of cheating as well due to lack of knowledge and awareness of people. The above points are all short -term disadvantages, clearly indicating that the surprise and sudden nullification of Rs 500 and 100 notes is a master stoke by the NDA government which will cut deep into the black money and corruption market. Terrorist funding will be deeply pruned so will be the issue of FICN (Fake Indian Currency Note). This will encourage electronic transactions in future, thereby increasing the number of formal transaction increasing government revenue by way of taxes and curb fraudulent financial transactions. Advantages are a too many to cover here.
    Sentence 9 : Demonetisation - The long and short of it India has a long-standing relationship with demonetisation. On January 16, 1978, Rs 1,000, Rs 5,000 and Rs 10,000 currency notes were scrapped through an ordinance, impacting 0.6 percent of the total currency in circulation at the time. Before that, India had experienced demonetisation of high-value currency in January, 1946. On both occasions, it impacted only a miniscule segment of the society and economy. (The salary of an entry-level government officer in 1978 was well below Rs 1,000.) Rs 100 was the highest denomination in circulation until October 1987, when Rs 500 notes were re-introduced, followed by the re-introduction of Rs 1,000 notes in November 2000. However, until 2000-01, the share of high value notes (i.e notes with value greater than Rs 500) was only 26.7 percent of the total currency in circulation. So, what is the immediate impact of the current demonetisation on the people and economy? To be precise: Unsettling. One can see long queues before banks and ATM machines. Workers in the unorganised sector, petty shopkeepers and small businesses are finding it difficult to cope. There is a visible tendency to hoard available legal tender in denominations of Rs 100 and below as emergency funds. In the absence of government statistics, if one relies on news reports, there seems to be some dip in immediate consumption expenditure. Given the scale of demonetisation, this was anticipated. The move was expected to create temporary problems as acknowledged by the prime minister himself. However, minor inconveniences apart, what will be the macro-economic impact? Demonetisation will reduce money supply in the economy. A cursory look at the Reserve bank of India’s data on money supply as on 11th of November shows that M3 (i.e., Broad Money) has shrunk by Rs 38,300 crore on a fortnightly basis and currency available with the public has shrunk by Rs 1.75 lakh crore, while demand deposits and time-deposits have increased. Reduction in money supply means falling consumer spending, investment spending and net exports, leaving aside government spending. It is likely to translate into a decline in nominal GDP in the immediate term. RBI has increased the Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR)—the share of total deposits that commercial banks have to hold as reserves either in cash or as deposits with the central bank—to 100 percent on additional deposits. Hence, hopes of a reduction in interest rates have already been diminished with short-term negative impacts on bank profitability. The unorganised sector, which forms a major part of the Indian economy, is likely to take a transitory hit as this sector operates mainly on a cash basis. While there will be an immediate dip in demand and negative short-term impacts on the economy coupled with hardships for citizens, demonetisation, as a policy measure, certainly has large-scale positive effects. This move is likely to improve tax compliance, given that the Goods and Services Tax (GST) is also on its way to become reality. Government would now have increased funds available for capital spending owing to higher tax collection. Moreover, the availability of funds would reduce the need for the government to borrow from the market, thus making available more credit for the private sector. The RBI may also be in a position to give a one-time bonanza to the government on account of untendered currency. The better fiscal position might also allow the government to reduce income tax rates, which would subsequently lead to higher disposable incomes with tax payers. All this would aid the consumption-multiplier effect. As with any policy decision, this move too will have multiple direct as well as indirect effects. The biggest positive certainly seems to be the eradication of some stocked and staked up money, perhaps earned through illegitimate means or tax evasion. The key here is patience. When 86 per cent of a country’s legal tender becomes illegal, it is but expected that finding ‘a new level of equilibrium’ would require time. If the smaller short-term risks, especially those emanating from the demand side are addressed carefully, if we undertake a holistic net cost benefit analysis, the expected results seem to be promising.
Cluster=1 What are the impacts of Demonetisation on Indian Economy Demonetization is a generations’ memorable experience and is going to be one of the economic events of our time. Its impact is felt by every Indian citizen. Demonetization affects the economy through the liquidity side. Its effect will be a telling one because nearly 86% of currency value in circulation was withdrawn without replacing bulk of it. As a result of the withdrawal of Rs 500 and Rs 1000 notes, there occurred huge gap in the currency composition as after Rs 100; Rs 2000 is the only denomination. Absence of intermediate denominations like Rs 500 and Rs 1000 will reduce the utility of Rs 2000. Effectively, this will make Rs 2000 less useful as a transaction currency though it can be a store value denomination. Demonetization technically is a liquidity shock; a sudden stop in terms of currency availability. It creates a situation where lack of currencies jams consumption, investment, production, employment etc. In this context, the exercise may produce following short term/long term/, consumption/investment, welfare/growth impacts on Indian economy. The intensity of demonetization effects clearly depends upon the duration of the liquidity shocks. Following are the main impacts. Demonetization is not a big disaster like global banking sector crisis of 2007; but at the same time, it will act as a liquidity shock that disturbs economic activities. Liquidity crunch (short term effect): liquidity shock means people are not able to get sufficient volume of popular denomination especially Rs 500. This currency unit is the favourable denomination in daily life. It constituted to nearly 49% of the previous currency supply in terms of value. Higher the time required to resupply Rs 500 notes, higher will be the duration of the liquidity crunch. Current reports indicate that all security printing press can print only 2000 million units of RS 500 notes by the end of this year. Nearly 16000 mn Rs 500 notes were in circulation as on end March 2016. Some portion of this were filled by the new Rs 2000 notes. Towards end of March approximately 10000 mn units will be printed and replaced. All these indicate that currency crunch will be in our economy for the next four months. Welfare loss for the currency using population: Most active segments of the population who constitute the ‘base of the pyramid’ uses currency to meet their transactions. The daily wage earners, other labourers, small traders etc. who reside out of the formal economy uses cash frequently. These sections will lose income in the absence of liquid cash. Cash stringency will compel firms to reduce labour cost and thus reduces income to the poor working class. There will be a trickle up effect of the liquidity chaos to the higher income people with time. 4. Consumption will be hit: When liquidity shortage strikes, it is consumption that is going to be adversely affected first. Consumption ↓→ Production ↓→ Employment ↓→ Growth ↓→ Tax revenue ↓ 5. Loss of Growth momentum– India risks its position of being the fastest growing largest economy: reduced consumption, income, investment etc. may reduce India’s GDP growth as the liquidity impact itself may last three -four months. 6. Impact on bank deposits and interest rate: Deposit in the short term may rise, but in the long term, its effect will come down. The savings with the banks are actually liquid cash people stored. It is difficult to assume that such ready cash once stored in their hands will be put into savings for a long term. They saved this money into banks just to convert the old notes into new notes. These are not voluntary savings aimed to get interest. It will be converted into active liquidity by the savers when full-fledged new currency supply take place. This means that new savings with banks is only transitory or short-term deposit. It may be encashed by the savers at the appropriate time. It is not necessary that demonetization will produce big savings in the banking system in the medium term. Most of the savings are obtained by biggie public sector banks like the SBI. They may reduce interest rate in the short/medium term. But they can’t follow it in the long term. 7. Impact on black money: Only a small portion of black money is actually stored in the form of cash. Usually, black income is kept in the form of physical assets like gold, land, buildings etc. Hence the amount of black money countered by demonetization depend upon the amount of black money held in the form of cash and it will be smaller than expected. But more than anything else, demonetization has a big propaganda effect. People are now much convinced about the need to fight black income. such a nationwide awareness and urge will encourage government to come out with even strong measures. 8. Impact on counterfeit currency: the real impact will be on counterfeit/fake currency as its circulation will be checked after this exercise. Demonetization as a cleaning exercise may produce several good things in the economy. At the same time, it creates unavoidable income and welfare losses to the poor sections of the society who gets income based on their daily work and those who doesn’t have the digital transaction culture. Overall economic activies will be dampened in the short term. But the unmeasurable benefits of having more transparency and reduced volume of black money activities can be pointed as long term benefits.

Cluster=2 2016 Indian banknote demonetisation Early political career Premiership On 8 November 2016, the Government of India announced the demonetisation of all ?500 and ?1000 banknotes of the Mahatma Gandhi Series. The government claimed that the action would curtail the shadow economy and crack down on the use of illicit and counterfeit cash to fund illegal activity and terrorism. The sudden nature of the announcement and the prolonged cash shortages in the weeks that followed created significant disruption throughout the economy, threatening economic output. Prime Minister of India Narendra Modi announced the demonetisation in an unscheduled live televised address at 20:00 Indian Standard Time (IST) on 8 November. In the announcement, Modi declared that use of all ?500 and ?1000 banknotes of the Mahatma Gandhi Series would be invalid past midnight, and announced the issuance of new ?500 and banknotes of the Mahatma Gandhi New Series in exchange for the old banknotes. The BSE SENSEX and stock indices fell over 6 percent on the day after the announcement. In the days following the demonetisation, the country faced severe cash shortages with severe detrimental effects across the economy. People seeking to exchange their bank notes had to stand in lengthy queues, and several deaths were linked to the rush to exchange cash. Initially, the move received support from several bankers as well as from some international commentators. The move has also been criticised as poorly planned and unfair, and was met with protests, litigation, and strikes against the government in several places across India. Debates also took place concerning the move in both houses of parliament. The move reduced the country's industrial production and its GDP growth rate. By the end of August 2017, 99% of the banned currency had been deposited in banks: only approximately ?14,000 crore of the total demonetised currency had been discarded, leading analysts to state that the effort had failed to remove black money from the economy. The Indian government had demonetised bank notes on two prior occasionsدnce in 1946 and then in 1978ءnd in both cases, the goal was to combat tax evasion by "black money" held outside the formal economic system. In 1946, the pre-independence government hoped demonetisation would penalise Indian businesses that were concealing the fortunes amassed supplying the Allies in World War II. In 1978, the Janata Party coalition government demonetised banknotes of 1000, 5000 and 10,000 rupees, again in the hopes of curbing counterfeit money and black money. In 2012, the Central Board of Direct Taxes had recommended against demonetisation, saying in a report that "demonetisation may not be a solution for tackling black money or shadow economy, which is largely held in the form of benami properties, bullion and jewellery." According to data from income tax probes, black money holders kept only 6% or less of their wealth as cash, suggesting that targeting this cash would not be a successful strategy. On 28 October 2016 the total banknotes in circulation in India were valued at ?17.77 trillion (US$280 billion); what proportion of this derived from ?500 and ?1,000 banknotes was unknown. In its annual report of March 2016, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) stated that total bank notes in circulation valued ?16.42 trillion (US$260 billion) of which nearly 86% (around ?14.18 trillion (US$220 billion)) derived from ?500 and ?1,000 banknotes. In terms of volume, the report stated that 24% (around 22.03 billion) of the total 9026.6 crore (90.26 billion) banknotes in circulation were ?500 and ?1,000 banknotes. The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) had previously expressed opposition to demonetisation. BJP spokesperson Meenakshi Lekhi had said in 2014 that members of the public who were often illiterate and had no access to banking facilities would be adversely affected by such a policy. The plan to demonetise the ?500 and ?1000 banknotes was initiated between six and ten months before it was announced, and was kept confidential, with only ten people being completely aware of it. The preparations for printing new ?500 and ?2000 bank notes began in early May 2016. The Union cabinet was informed about the plan on 8 November 2016 in a meeting called by the Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi. On 8 November 2016, Modi announced the demonetisation in an unscheduled live national televised address at 20:15 Indian Standard Time. In the announcement, Modi declared circulation of all ?500 and ?1,000 banknotes of the Mahatma Gandhi Series as invalid effective from the midnight of the same day, and announced the issuance of new ?500 and banknotes of the Mahatma Gandhi New Series in exchange for the old notes. After Modi's announcement, the Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, Urjit Patel, and Economic Affairs Secretary, Shaktikanta Das, stated that while the supply of notes of all denominations had increased by 40 percent between 2011 and 2016, the ?500 and ?1,000 banknotes increased by 76 percent and 109 percent, respectively, owing to forgery. They said that forged cash was used to fund terrorist activities, and that the demonetisation was meant to counter this. Patel also stated that the decision had been made about six months ago, and the printing of new banknotes of denomination ?500 and ?2,000 had already started. However, only the top members of the government, security agencies and the central bank were aware of the move. But media had reported in October 2016 about the introduction of ?2,000 denomination well before the official announcement by RBI. This statement has led to much debate, because the Reserve Bank governor six months before the announcement was Raghuram Rajan, while the new banknotes have the signature of the newly appointed governor, Urjit Patel. The Reserve Bank of India stipulated that the demonetised notes could be deposited with banks over a period of fifty days until 30 December 2016. The banknotes could also be exchanged for legal tender over the counter at all banks. The limit for such exchange was ?4,000 per person from 8 to 13 November, was increased to ?4,500 per person from 14 to 17 November, reduced to ?2,000 per person from 18 November. International airports also facilitated an exchange of notes for foreign tourists and out-bound travelers, amounting to a total value of ?5,000 per person. The exchange of banknotes was stopped completely on 25 November: Modi had previously stated that the volume of exchange would be increased after 24 November. Cash withdrawals from bank accounts were restricted to ?10,000 per day and ?20,000 per week per account from 10 to 13 November. This limit was increased to ?24,000 per week from 14 November 2016. A daily limit on withdrawals from ATMs was also imposed varying from ?2,000 per day till 14 November, and ?2,500 per day till 31 December. This limit was increased to ?4,500 per day from 1 January, and again to ?10,000 from 16 January 2017. Limits placed vide the circulars cited above on cash withdrawals from Current accounts/ Cash credit accounts/ Overdraft accounts stand withdrawn with immediate effect. RBI increased the withdrawal limit from Savings Bank account to Rs 50,000 from the earlier Rs 24,000 on 20 February 2017 and then on 13 March 2017, it removed all withdrawal limits from Savings Bank Accounts. Under the revised guidelines issued on 17 November 2016, families were allowed to withdraw ?250,000 (?2.5 lakh) for wedding expenses from one account provided it was KYC compliant. The rules were also changed for farmers who are permitted to withdraw ?25,000 per week from their accounts against crop loans. The Specified Bank Notes (Cessation of Liabilities) Ordinance, 2016 was issued by on 28 December 2016 ceasing the liability of the government for the banned bank notes, and also imposing fines on people found carrying out transactions with them after 8 November 2016; or holding more than ten of them after 30 December 2016. The ordinance also provided for the exchange of the bank notes after 30 December for non-resident citizens and others on a case by case basis. Fuel pumps, government hospitals, railway and airline booking counters, state-government recognised dairies and ration stores, and crematoriums were allowed to accept the banned ?500 and ?1,000 bank notes until 2 December 2016. A fortnight before the official announcement, a news report in the Hindi daily Dainik Jagran quoting RBI sources speaking of the planned release of new 2000 rupee notes alongside withdrawal of 500 and 1000 rupee notes. Similar news was reported in The Hindu Business Line on 21 October 2016, also describing a forthcoming 2000 rupee note and the possible withdrawal of 500 and 1000 rupee notes. The chairman of the State Bank of India had also openly spoken in April 2016 about the possibility of demonetisation of ?500 and ?1000 notes. Prominent businessmen stated after the announcement of demonetisation that they had received prior warning of the move, allowing them to convert their money into smaller denominations. A BJP MLA from Rajasthan, Bhawani Singh Rajawat, claimed in a video that wealthy businessmen were informed about the demonetisation before it occurred. He later denied the comments. More than 30 politicians belonging to the BJP were arrested and investigated for having unaccounted money in the new 2000 rupee denomination. The decision met with mixed initial reactions. Several bankers like Arundhati Bhattacharya (Chairperson of State Bank of India) and Chanda Kochhar (MD & CEO of ICICI Bank) appreciated the move in the sense that it would help curb black money. Businessmen Anand Mahindra (Mahindra Group), Sajjan Jindal (JSW Group), Kunal Bahl (Snapdeal and FreeCharge) also supported the move adding that it would also accelerate e-commerce. Infosys founder N. R. Narayana Murthy praised the move. The Indian National Congress spokesperson Randeep Surjewala welcomed the move but remained sceptical on the consequences that would follow. Chief Minister of Bihar Nitish Kumar supported the move. The demonetisation also got support from Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh Nara Chandrababu Naidu. Former Chief Election Commissioner of India S. Y. Quraishi said demonetisation could lead to long term electoral reforms. Indian social activist Anna Hazare hailed demonetisation as a revolutionary step. The former President of India Pranab Mukherjee welcomed the demonetisation move by calling it bold step. The opinion of the masses varied both ways on micro-blogs and social media sites like Twitter. By and large, international response was positive which saw the move as a bold crackdown on corruption.International Monetary Fund (IMF) issued a statement supporting Modi's efforts to fight corruption by the demonetisation policy. Chinese state media Global Times praised the move and termed it as "fierce fight against black money and corruption." Former Prime Minister of Finland and Vice-President of European Commission Jyrki Katainen welcomed the demonetisation move stressing that bringing transparency will strengthen Indian economy.BBC's South Asia Correspondent Justin Rowlatt in his article praised the move for its secrecy and success and elaborated on reason behind demonetisation.Tim Worstall termed the demonetisation as welcome macroeconomic effect in his article in Forbes magazine. Swedish Minister of Enterprise Mikael Damberg supported the move by calling it bold decision. Indian-American economist Jagdish Bhagwati praised the demonetisation. The Indian Supreme Court while hearing one among a slew of cases filed against the sudden demonetisation decision in various courts, observed that it "appears to be carpet bombing and not surgical strike" which government repeatedly claims it to be. Nobel laureate Indian economist Amartya Sen, severely criticised the demonetisation move calling it a "despotic action" among other things. Former Senior Vice-President and Chief Economist of the World Bank, Kaushik Basu, called it a 'major mistake' and said that the 'damage' is likely to be much greater than any possible benefits. Pronab Sen, former Chief Statistician and Planning Commission of India member, called it a "hollow move" since it did not really address any of the purported goals of tackling black money or fake currency. Prabhat Patnaik, a former professor of economics at the Jawaharlal Nehru University, Delhi called the move 'witless' and 'anti-people'. He criticised the simple way in which black money was assumed as "a hoard of cash", saying that it would have little effect in eliminating "black activities" while "causing much hardship to common people." Noted economist and journalist, T. N. Ninan wrote in the Business Standard that demonetisation 'looks like a bad idea, badly executed on the basis of some half-baked notions'.Deepak Parekh (Chairman of HDFC) had initially appreciated the decision to ban the ? 500 and ? 1000 notes, but later said that the move had derailed the economy, and expressed skepticism about its outcome. Industrialist Rajiv Bajaj criticised the demonetisation, saying that not just the execution, but the concept of demonetisation was wrong in itself. Chief Ministers of several Indian states like Mamata Banerjee,Arvind Kejriwal and Pinarayi Vijayan have criticised and led major protests against the decision in their states and in parliament. Initially, the move to demonetise and try to hinder black money was appreciated, but the manner in which it was carried out by causing hardships to common people was criticised. A Public Interest Litigation (PIL) was filed in Madras High Court by M Seeni Ahamed, General Secretary of the Indian National League, to scrap the decision. The High Court dismissed the PIL stating that it could not interfere in monetary policies of the government. Similar PILs were also filed in the Supreme Court of India.Supreme Court of India is yet to decide on the matter. It is listed for hearing on 2 December 2016. Several government ministers had declared before the demonetisation that they were holding large amounts of cash, including Arun Jaitley, who had more than 65 lakh rupees in cash. This led to speculation about whether and when the ministers had deposited the cash they held. Steve Forbes described the move as 'Sickening And Immoral'. He stated that "What India has done is commit a massive theft of people's property without even the pretense of due process--a shocking move for a democratically elected government." Nobel laureate Paul Krugman said that it is difficult to see gains from demonetisation, while there may be significant costs to it. The demonetisation also came in for sharp criticism from media outside India, with the New York Times saying that the demonetisation was "atrociously planned" and that it did not appear to have combatted black money, while an article in The Guardian stated that "Modi has brought havoc to India". The Harvard Business Review called it "a case study in poor policy and even poorer execution" The frequent change in the narrative on objectives of the demonetisation to its visible impact on the poorest of the poor made other critiques calling government's narrative as spins in view of the "pointless suffering on India's poorest." A Parliamentary panel report in April 2017 stated that rural households and honest taxpayers were the worst hit by demonetisation. It said that it was not just the poor that suffered, but the manufacturing sector was impacted too. According to the panel, demonetisation created significant disruption throughout economy, because it was carried out without prior study or research. A Congress led opposition which includes 13 political parties, opposed the current government on the demonetisation issue in the Winter Session of the Indian Parliament on 16 November 2016. The Chief Minister of West Bengal Mamata Banerjee also met the President Pranab Mukherjee to oppose the demonetisation. The debate on demonetisation is known to be initiated by Indian National Congress and Anand Sharma in the Rajya Sabha on 16 November 2016, while Banerjee is known to be the first to oppose the current government on the demonetisation. On 16 November 2016, Banerjee led a rainbow delegation comprising political parties of Trinamool Congress, Aam Aadmi Party, BJP ally Shiv Sena, Patidar Anamat Andolan Samiti (of Hardik Patel) and National Conference to Rashtrapati Bhawan to protest against the decision to withdraw the ?500 and ?1000 banknotes. A memorandum was submitted to the President of India Pranab Mukherjee demanding rollback of the decision. Outside the Parliament in a rally the same day, Saugata Roy, a member of parliament from the opposition Trinamool Congress Party, commented, "People are in utter distress, especially the informal sector is totally disrupted. Poor people, daily wage earners, they're all facing difficulty." In the demonetisation debate on the first day of the winter session of Parliament at the Rajya Sabha, Pramod Tiwari from the Indian National Congress compared Narendra Modi to Benito Mussolini, Adolf Hitler and Muammar Gaddafi.Prem Chand Gupta, a member of the Rashtriya Janata Dal, questioned a statement of Modi from the unscheduled TV broadcast on 8 November, "If it was planned 10 months ago, how did RBI Governor Urjit Patel sign on new note?". Praful Patel, a member of the Nationalist Congress Party, stated that "the government was not even prepared to recalibrate the ATMs while announcing the move. People's suffering are unimaginable. Nobody is questioning the government's intention, but you are unprepared to execute the move". Later, the former Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh Mayawati Prabhu Das stated the situation to "a financial emergency", by saying "It looks as if Bharat has shut down." Also, Sitaram Yechury from Communist Party of India, questioned the government on the demonetisation move by stating "only 6% of black money in India is in cash to drive his point that demonetisation won't curb illicit wealth." On 17 November 2016, in a rally against demonetisation of ?500 and ?1000 notes, led by the Chief Minister of Delhi Arvind Kejriwal and his West Bengal counterpart Mamata Banerjee at Azadpur Mandi, the biggest vegetable and fruits wholesale hub in the national capital; Kejriwal demanded the withdrawal of demonetisation in 3 days. Banerjee also stated "I give the government 3 day ultimatum, fix things or withdraw the demonetisation scheme". In the demonetisation debate on the second and third day of the Winter Session of Parliament, on 17 and 18 November 2016, the opposition and the government clashed over the demonetisation issue, bringing the house to continuous halts. On 24 November 2016, in the demonetisation debate, the former prime minister of India Manmohan Singh said "this scheme will hurt small industries, the farming sector. The GDP can decline by about 3 per cent due to this move", while he also questioned "I would like to ask the Prime Minister examples of countries where people have deposited their money in the banks and not allowed to withdraw their own money." and later also said "It is no good that on each day banks bring out new notifications. It doesn't reflect properly on Prime Minister's Office, Finance Minister and the Reserve Bank of India. Cooperative banking system has been prevented from handling cash". Singh at last termed the demonetisation move as an "organised loot, legalised plunder of the common people". As the demonetisation was opposed in both houses of the parliament, it triggered organised nationwide strikes across India. Opposition parties like Indian National Congress, Bahujan Samaj Party, Trinamool Congress, DMK, JD(U), AIADMK, Nationalist Congress Party, Left, Rashtriya Janata Dal and the Samajwadi Party decided to observe ҁkrosh DiwasҠas, a protest campaign day on 28 November and launch protests in front of banks, demanding that money be returned to people. In the state of Bihar, 15 trains were blocked and stranded, while the states of West Bengal, Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh saw protest marches and rallies led by opposition parties. In the state of Kerala, shops and business establishments were shut, with school and colleges closed throughout the state, while movements of private vehicles were also disrupted in Northern Kerala. The government had estimated that ?3 trillion, or approximately 20%, of the demonetised notes would be permanently removed from circulation. However, by 30 December 2016, approximately 97% of the demonetised banknotes, or ?14.97 trillion ($220 billion) of the ?15.4 trillion that had been demonetised, had been deposited with the banking system. A Central Bank report released in August 2017 stated that a total 99% of the ? 500 and ? 1000 notes that were demonetised returned to the banking system, a figure far larger than the government had expected at the time of banning the notes. Therefore, the government failed in its aim of purging black money from the economy. Modi had stated that due to demonetisation, corrupt officials, businessmen and criminals נpopularly believed to hoard large amounts of illicit cash נwould be stuck with "worthless pieces of paper". Economic analyst Vivek Kaul stated in a BBC article that "demonetisation had been a failure of epic proportions." Nobel laureate Kailash Satyarthi and others working to fight human trafficking said that the note ban had led to a huge fall in sex trafficking, but that the trade had already begun rebounding by the following month. Satyarthi said the demonetisation would be effective in combating exploitation of children as well as corruption and would be a great obstacle to traffickers. However, 2 months later he expressed his disappointment on Rs 2000 notes being pushed into human trafficking in absence of other concrete steps. Demonetisation has badly hit Maoist and Naxalites as well. The surrender rate has reached its highest since demonetisation was announced. It is said that the money these organisations collected over the years have now lost their value making them take such a decision. The move also reportedly crippled Communist guerrilla groups (Naxalites) financing through money laundering. On 10 November the police arrested a petrol pump owner at Ranchi when he reportedly tried to deposit ?2.5 billion, belonging to a person affiliated with the banned Communist Party of India (Maoist). According to Chhattisgarh Police demonetisation has affected the Naxalite activities. It is reported that insurgents have stashed more than ?70 billion in the Bastar region. The scarcity of cash due to demonetisation led to chaos, and most people holding old banknotes faced difficulties in exchanging them due to endless queues outside banks and ATMs across India, which became a daily routine for millions of people waiting to deposit or exchange the ?500 and ?1000 banknotes since 9 November. ATMs were running out of cash after a few hours of being functional, and around half the ATMs in the country were non-functional. Sporadic violence was reported in New Delhi, but there were no reports of any grievous injury, people attacked bank premises and ATMs, and a ration shop was looted in Madhya Pradesh after the shop owner refused to accept ?500 banknotes. The CMD of Punjab National Bank said that panic after demonetisation started fading on 19 November 2016. As of 18 December 2016, there were still long queues at banks and ATMs. Three months after the withdrawal of banknotes, a quarter of the ATMs were still short of cash. Ҍive ATM AlertҠwas a hashtag campaign started by a group of youngsters from a Facebook community called '7PM Status'. It launched a campaign for crowdsourcing locations of ATMs in their vicinity that were live and working. The public were asked to post the location and details of ATMs that were live and dispensing cash, including a hashtag #LiveATMAlert or by tagging the group in their post in Facebook or Twitter. The group would in turn collate all gathered information and broadcast it to their followers at regular intervals. The cash shortage was still ongoing in the month of April 2017, five months after the demonetisation. According to a survey, the situation was as bad as 83% of people being unable to withdraw money in Hyderabad, while in Pune, the figure was 69%. In March 2017, the government stated that they received no official report on deaths connected to demonetisation. Several people were reported to have died from standing in queues for hours to exchange their old banknotes. Deaths were also attributed to lack of medical help due to refusal of old banknotes by hospitals. As of 15 November 2016, the attributed death toll was 25. and 33 deaths as of 18 November. In an interview, Chief Minister of Delhi Arvind Kejriwal lashed out at a BBC reporter who asked him to justify his 19 November claim that 55 deaths were linked to demonetisation. By the end of the year, opposition leaders claimed that over 100 people had died due to demonetisation. As a combined effect of demonetisation and US presidential election, the stock market indices dropped to an around six-month low in the week following the announcement. The day after the demonetisation announcement, BSE SENSEX crashed nearly 1,689 points and plunged by over 541 points. By the end of the intraday trading section on 15 November 2016, the BSE SENSEX index was lower by 565 points and the index was below 8100 intraday. After the demonetisation was announced, about 800,000 truck drivers were affected with scarcity of cash, with around 400,000 trucks stranded at major highways across India were reported. While major highway toll junctions on the Gujarat and Delhi-Mumbai highways also saw long queues as toll plaza operators refused the old banknotes. Nitin Gadkari, the Minister of Transport, subsequently announced a suspension of toll collections on all national highways across India until midnight of 11 November, later extended until 14 November and again until midnight of 18 November, and yet again till 2 December. Transactions in the Indian agriculture sector are heavily dependent on cash and were adversely affected by the demonetisation of ?500 and ?1,000 banknotes. Due to scarcity of the new banknotes, many farmers have insufficient cash to purchase seeds, fertilisers and pesticides needed for the plantation of rabi crops usually sown around mid-November. Farmers and their unions conducted protest rallies in Gujarat, Amritsar and Muzaffarnagar against the demonetisation as well as against restrictions imposed by the Reserve Bank of India on district cooperative central banks which were ordered not to accept or exchange the demonetised banknotes. The demonetisation led to unavailability of cash to pay for food products. The reduction in demand that arose in turn led to a crash in the prices of crops. Farmers were unable to recover even the costs of transportation from their fields to the market from the low prices offered. The prices dropped as low as 50 paise per kilo for tomatoes and onions. This forced the farmers across the country to dump their products in desperation. Some farmers resorted to burying unsold vegetables. Agricultural produce such as vegetables, foodgrains, sugarcane, milk and eggs were dumped on roads. Some farmers dumped their produce in protest against the government. By the second week after demonetisation of ?500 and ?1,000 banknotes, cigarette sales across India witnessed a fall of 30ִ0%, while E-commerce companies saw up to a 30% decline in cash on delivery (COD) orders. The demonetisation was initially seen by some sources as a significant step towards making India a cashless economy. Prime Minister Narendra Modi appealed to Indian population in his radio address in Dec 2016 to go cashless with slogan - Ҍess-cashҠfirst, ңashless societyҠnext. More people began using cards and e-wallets, and the demand for point of sales (POS) or card swipe machines increased. This led to the acceleration of installation of POS machines According to data of Pine Labs, the demand for its POS machines doubled after the decision. The company stated that the debit card transactions rose by 108% and credit card transactions by 60% on 9 November 2016. However concerns were raised regarding the lack security of mobile apps used for digital transactions. Several e-commerce companies hailed the demonetisation decision as an impetus to an increase in digital payments, hoping that it would lead to a decline in COD returns which could cut down their costs. In December 2016, the government launched an app called BHIM (Bharat Interface for Money) based on the Unified Payment Interface. In September 2017, Google launched its first India-only banking app using BHIM called Google Tez, that can be used by customers of over 50 banks on the UPI platform, and is available in several Indian languages. Both the Immediate Mobile Payments System (IMPS) and the United Payments Interface (UPI), which support instant payments using mobile phones, have grown substantially since demonetisation, even as cash has returned to the economy. After peaking in December 2016, digital transactions declined from January 2017 onwards, thus thwarting the objective of increasing digital payments through demonetisation. Global analysts cut their forecasts of India's GDP growth rate for the financial year 2016-17 by 0.5 to 3 percent due to demonetisation. India's GDP in 2016 is estimated to be US$2.25 trillion, hence, each 1 per cent reduction in growth rate represents a shortfall of US$22.5 billion (? 1.54 lakh crore) for the Indian economy. According to Societe Generale, India's quarterly GDP growth rates would drop below 7% for an entire year at a stretch for the first time since June 2011. India's GDP growth for the quarter Jan-Mar '17 was 6.1% as against a forecast of 7.1% by economists. The GDP growth for the entire fiscal year was 7.1%, a reduction from the 8% of the previous year. This drop in GDP was attributed to demonetisation by economists. The GDP growth rate for the quarter April - June 2017 dropped to 5.7%, in comparison to 7.9% for the same quarter in the previous year. This drop in GDP growth was attributed to demonetisation. This was the lowest growth in GDP since 2014. There was a reduction in industrial output as industries were hit by the cash crisis. The Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI) fell to 46.7 in November from 54.5 in October, recording its sharpest reduction in three years. A reading above 50 indicates growth and a reading below shows contraction. This indicates a slowdown in both, manufacturing and services industries. The PMI report showed also showed that the reduction in inflation in November was due to shortage in money supply. The growth in eight core sectors such as cement, steel and refinery products, which constitute 38% of the Index of Industrial Production (IIP), was only to 4.9 percent in November as compared with 6.6 percent in October. There was a loss of jobs due to demonetisation, particularly in the unorganised and informal sector and in small enterprises. Labour union jobs were crashed The Finance Ministry instructed all revenue intelligence agencies to join the crackdown on forex traders, hawala operators and jewellers besides tracking movement of demonetised currency notes. It was reported that the Prime Minister's Office (PMO) and the Prime Minister Modi himself were directly coordinating the raids conducted by the Income Tax, Enforcement Directorate (ED) and other agencies. As of 23 December, PMO received around 700 calls giving information about black money and it directly forwarded the information to various law enforcement agencies for further action. Income Tax departments raided various illegal tax-evasive businesses in Delhi, Mumbai, Chandigarh, Ludhiana and other cities that traded with demonetised currency. The Enforcement Directorate issued several FEMA notices to forex and gold traders. Large sum of cash in defunct notes were seized in different parts of the country. In Chhattisgarh liquid cash worth of ?4.4 million (US$69,000) was seized. As of 28 December, official sources said that the Income Tax department detected over ?41.72 billion (US$650 million) of un-disclosed income and seized new notes worth ?1.05 billion (US$16 million) as part of its country-wide operations. The department carried out a total of 983 search, survey and enquiry operations under the provisions of the Income Tax Act and has issued 5,027 notices to various entities on charges of tax evasion and hawala-like dealings. The department also seized cash and jewellery worth over ?5.49 billion (US$86 million) out of which the new currency seized (majority of them ?2000 notes) is valued at about ?1.05 billion (US$16 million). The department also referred a total of 477 cases to other agencies like the CBI and the Enforcement Directorate (ED) to probe other financial crimes like money laundering, disproportionate assets and corruption. In a period of four months from 9 November 2016 to 28 February 2017, CBDT claims to have detected an undisclosed income of over ?93.34 billion (US$1.5 billion) through more than 2,362 search, seizure and survey actions by Income Tax department. The number of I-T returns filed for 2016-17 grew by 25 per cent to 2.82 crore, and the advance tax collections during that period rose 41.8% over the 1-year period, as increased number of individuals filed their tax returns post demonetisation. The Indian officials said: "The number of returns filed as on August 5 stands at 2,82,92,955 as against 2,26,97,843 filed during the corresponding period of the fiscal year 2016-2017, registering an increase of 24.7% compared to growth rate of 9.9% in the previous year." Advance tax collections of personal income tax (i.e. other than corporate tax) as on 5 August 2017, showed a growth of about 41.79% over the corresponding period in FY 2016-2017. Personal income tax under self-assessment tax (SAT) grew at 34.25% over the corresponding period in FY 2016-2017. As the use of the demonetised notes had been allowed by the government for the payment of municipal and local body taxes, it led to people using the demonetised ?500 and ?1,000 notes to pay large amounts of outstanding and advance taxes. As a result, revenue collections of the local civic bodies jumped. The Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation reported collecting about ?1.6 billion (US$25 million) in cash payments of outstanding and advance taxes, within 4 days. The tax collection by local bodies have surged over 260% and more than 15,000 crore more after 14 days of demonetisation. The total indirect tax collection rose to 14.2% only in the month of December according to Finance Minister Arun Jaitley. Large amounts of cash in the form of new notes were seized all over the country after the demonetisation. As of December 2016, over 4 crore in new banknotes of ?2000 were seized from four persons in Bangalore, ?33 lakh in ?2000 notes were recovered from Manish Sharma, an expelled BJP leader in West Bengal, and ?1.5 crore was seized in Goa. 900 notes of the new ?2000 notes were seized from a BJP leader in Tamil Nadu. Around ?10 crore in new notes were seized in Chennai. As of 10 December, ?242 crore in new notes had been seized. It was noted in the media that while people were dying in queues to obtain a few thousand rupees in cash, persons with the right connections were able to amass crores of rupees in new notes, thus rendering the demonetisation exercise futile. The government announced that seized notes would be returned to circulation to address the shortage of cash. This announcement was in contrast to the regular practice of keeping seized cash in strong rooms until tax cases had been ruled upon in the courts. The government had initially announced that any person who is unable to deposit the old notes by 31 December 2016 would be given an opportunity to do so until a later date. However, the government allowed only NRIs to deposit old notes after 31 December 2016. As a result, many people with legitimately earned old notes were left stranded with old currency notes. This included soldiers who were on duty during the demonetisation period, people who had suffered a bereavement, and persons who had old notes received as wedding gifts before the demonetisation. Many people found small amounts of currency stashed away inside quilts, pillows, cupboards, lockers, behind old photographs and wall hangings, in some cases by family members who had died. In one case, two destitute orphans found ? 96,000 left by their mother and petitioned the Prime Minister for relief. A poor woman who was unable to get her old notes exchanged stripped outside the RBI office in desperation.OCIs and PIOs were also not allowed to exchange old notes. People petitioned the courts to allow deposit of the old banknotes. The Supreme Court of India also questioned the government on this matter. The dividend paid by the Reserve Bank to the government for the financial year 2016-17 was Rs. 30.7 lakh crore, as against the expectation of Rs. 74.9 lakh crore. This was less than half the dividend of Rs 65.9 lakh crore paid by the RBI in 2015-16. This decrease was due to demonetisation. It was estimated that this decrease in income for the government could cause the fiscal deficit for the financial year 2016-17 to increase from the targeted 3.2% to 3.4%. To avoid increasing the fiscal deficit, the government would have to reduce spending on social schemes, or increase revenue through taxes or other means. In Gujarat, Delhi and many other major cities, sales of gold increased on 9 November, with an increased 20 to 30% premium surging the price as much as ?45,000 (US$700) from the ruling price of ?31,900 (US$500) per 10 grams (0.35 oz). Income Tax officials raided multiple branches of Axis Bank and found bank officials involved in money laundering acts, exchanging old notes for gold. In India, the cash deposited into hundis, or cash collection boxes in temples and gurudwaras are exempted from inquiry by the tax department. This exemption is sometimes misused to launder money. After the note ban, there was a spike in donations in the form of the demonetised notes in temples. Authorities of Sri Jalakanteswarar temple at Vellore discovered cash worth ?4.4 million (US$69,000) from the temple hundi in the form of defunct notes. There have been reports of people circumventing the restrictions imposed on exchange transactions by conducting multiple transactions at different bank branches and also sending hired people, employees and followers in groups to exchange large amounts of banned currency at banks. In response, the government announced that it would start marking customers with indelible ink. This was in addition to other measures proposed to ensure that the exchange transactions are carried out only once by each person. As soon as the demonetisation was announced, it was observed by the Indian Railways authorities that a large number of people started booking tickets particularly in classes 1A and 2A for the longest distance possible, to get rid of unaccounted cash. A senior official said, "On November 13, 42.7 million passengers were nationally booked across all classes. Of these, only 1,209 were 1A and 16,999 for 2A. It is a sharp dip from the number of passengers booked on November 9, when 27,237 passengers had booked tickets in 1A and 69,950 in 2A." The Railways Ministry and the Railway Board responded swiftly and decided that cancellation and refund of tickets of value ?10,000 and above will not be allowed by any means involving cash. The payment can only be through cheque/electronic payment. Tickets above ?10,000 can be refunded by filing ticket deposit receipt only on surrendering the original ticket. A copy of the PAN card must be submitted for any cash transaction above ?50,000. The railway claimed that since the Railway Board on 10 November imposed a number of restrictions to book and cancel tickets, the number of people booking 1A and 2A tickets came down. The Enforcement Directorate raided several forex establishments making back dated entries. Money laundering using backdated accounting was carried out by co-operative banks, jewellers, sellers of iPhones, and several other businesses.

Cluster=3 Effects Of Demonetisation On India's GDP - Difficult To Calculate, We Don't Even Know The Sign The demonetisation effort being led by PM Modi in India is that idea that Rs 500 and Rs 1,000 notes should be declared no longer legal tender, to be replaced by other notes of different designs and in one case, denominations. The aim is to wash the stock of "black money" out of the economy and get it into the licit, banked and taxable, part of the economy. The microeconomic effects here seem, as I've said before, to be beneficial. There have long been concerns about terror financing through forged notes for example. There's quite obviously substantial tax revenue going uncollected. And perhaps the biggest effect is, as I've said, that large portions of the population feel that the basic system is unfair. They're locked out of that easier world where matters are settled in large amounts of cash, where tax is not paid and where favours are bought. However, we should also think about the macroeconomic effects here. And that's difficult--because we're not even sure what the sign of the effect will be, positive or negative, let alone the size of it. It's actually possible for this to run either way: Ambit Capital, a respected Mumbai-based equity research firm, has officially estimated that the demonetisation-driven cash crunch will result in GDP growth crashing to 0.5% in the second half of financial year 2016-17. This means the GDP growth for six months, from October 2016 to March 2017, could decelerate to 0.5%, down from 6.4% in the previous six months. Further, Ambit Capital estimates that during the October to December quarter that we are currently in, the GDP growth may contract, thus showing negative growth. However, Ambit is hopeful that a strong formalisation of the informal economy will ensue through 2017 until 2019 and this disruption could also crimp GDP growth in 2017-18 to 5.8 % from their earlier estimate of 7.3%. That's perhaps the case for the prosecution. The disruption to the economy will be such that there will be, possibly, not just no growth in this last quarter of the year but actually a shrinking of the economy. "The demonetisation-driven cash crunch that is playing out in India will paralyse economic activity in the short term. We expect a strong 'formalisation effect' to play out as nearly half of the non-tax paying businesses in the informal sector (40% share in GDP) will become unviable and cede market share to their organised sector counterparts. We expect this dynamic to crimp GDP growth in India in FY18 as well and hence we have cut our FY18 GDP growth estimate to 5.8 per cent YoY (from 7.3 per cent)," Ambit economists Ritika Mankar Mukherjee, Sumit Shekhar and Prashant Mittal said in a note. It's a possibility, certainly. But it's not a certainty. For economies are complex things with many moving parts. I've already pointed out that the inflow of money into bank accounts will reduce interest rates and that has a stimulatory effect upon economic growth. And we're reducing the budget deficit as some of that black money gets taxed, which will reduce inflation--again beneficial. But there's yet one more thing we need to consider and that's the effect upon the money supply. Which is surprisingly difficult to work out: In mathematical terms, velocity of money is the ratio between GDP and money in circulation—which RBI estimates to be around 1.3 for India. However by ‘money’, it does not mean the cash that we exchange in day-to-day transactions (part of something called high powered money or M0). Instead it is broad money (also known as M3) where you also include bank deposits, post office savings and other bits and pieces of financial savings. M3 and M0 in India are linked by a factor of 6—so roughly speaking, R1 of cash in circulation, ultimately adds up to R6 worth of broad money. So, if velocity of money calculated using broad money is 1.3, then it equates to six-times the amount, or 7.8 with respect to cash in circulation. So we now have a measure of how quickly transactional cash changes hands in the legitimate Indian economy. It's worth reading that analysis in full as it is very thought provoking. And the thought it provokes in me is that we just don't know. We don't even know, again, what the sign on the effect will be, positive or negative, let alone the size of it. We've the two types of money, M0 and M4 (to use the English terms) base money and broad. One is just cash and central bank reserves, the other is that multiplied by the velocity of money and the actions of the banking system. We're taking some portion of base money out of the system--whatever portion of black money simply vanishes as a result of demonetisation. A decrease in the money supply is contractionary upon the economy. However, look at our problem here. We've got a good idea of what V, velocity, is in the formal economy. And we don't know what it is in the informal or black economy. And we really don't know, we've not a clue, not a scoobie. Which is something of a problem because we can surmise it either way. We could assume that those who commit their nefarities with black money quickly move that on so as to be able to gain more. V in the informal economy would be high therefore. We might also assume that people stash the cash nuder the bed and it stays there for years. V would be very low therefore. In fact, we will, obviously, assume that some people do the one, some the other, and many do either dependent upon their whims. Which means that we've simply got no idea at all, not that scoobie, about what the overall effect is. If V is very much lower in the informal economy then even with the loss of some of that base money and the move of the rest into the formal banking system then the broad money supply will expand as a result. That's stimulatory. If V is higher in that informal economy than in the formal then the demonetisation move significantly reduces the broad money supply and that's contractionary. And we've not that scoobie about which way it will go. All of which rather brings us to Hayek's point, that we can't plan an economy. The major reason being that it's too complicated and we can never gain enough information to be able to do so. More than that, the only thing we've got which can calculate an economy is the economy itself. The effects of change are emergent from the system itself, not something that we can determine beforehand. Thus we just don't know what the macroeconomic effect of demonetisation is going to be. It's something we've just got to wait and see about.

Cluster=4 1.5 Million Jobs Lost, GDP At A Low: The State Of The Indian Economy After Demonetisation Demonetisation is going to be a landmark in the history of the Indian economy. It was an experience which might create fear in the minds of the people who indulge in illegal activities like tax evasion or money laundering of any kind. On November 8, 2016, the Indian government declared that the 500 and 1000 rupee notes will be stripped of their status as legal tender effective from midnight. These notes accounted for 86 percent of the country’s cash supply by value. Citizens were given time till December 31, 2016 to deposit their old currency notes and exchange them for the new currency notes of rupee 500 and 2000. The government’s aim was to root out counterfeit currency, fight tax evasion, curb inflation, eliminate black money and terror-funding, and to promote a cashless economy. When a currency note of a particular denomination ceases to be a legal tender, it is termed as demonetisation. Legal tender refers to money which can be legally used to make payments of debts or other obligations. A creditor is obliged by law to receive such money in payment of due debt to him. The term demonetisation is not new to the Indian economy. The highest denomination note ever printed by the Reserve Bank of India was the 10,000 rupee note in 1938 and again in 1954. It was demonetised first in 1946 and then in 1978. Since not many people had access to such notes at the time, this did not have a big impact on the country. The latest round of demonetisation has undoubtedly affected the common public and bankers. It has had many short term effects which are visible. The long term effects are yet to be experienced and felt. Impact Of Demonetisation On The Indian Economy On Gross Domestic Product (GDP): The Indian economy is a cash-driven economy and demonetisation has largely affected its growth. The GDP growth rate of 8.01% in 2015-2016 fell to 7.11% in 2016-2017 after demonetisation. This was largely due to less availability of cash in cash-intensive industries like manufacturing and construction. It has also adversely impacted the primary function of banks to issue loans and has put pressure on them as current account holders demand0 large sums of cash. On Daily Wage Workers: A major portion of the Indian workforce is a part of the informal economy. They use cash to meet all their expenses and demonetisation has resulted in a lot of them losing their jobs due to unavailability of cash. According to CMIE’s Consumer Pyramids Household Surveys (CPHS), approximately 1.5 million jobs were lost during the final quarter of the financial year 2016-17. The estimated employment during this period was 405 million as compared to 406.5 million during the previous four months. On Small Scale Industries:Businesses like the textile industry, salons, restaurants, and seasonal businesses are low capital enterprises and work on the basis of liquidity preference. Demonetisation gravely impacted their revenue collection and threatened their existence to an extent. On Black Money: Though only a small portion of black money is stored in the form of cash and majority is in the form of physical assets like gold, land, and building, demonetisation of the rupee 500 and 1000 notes might take out a lot of black money from the economy. On the General Economic Situation: Till months after demonetisation the general economic situation was disturbed. The public had to queue up outside banks to exchange their old currency for new ones. Households lacked liquidity and could not do transactions for daily items. Small shopkeepers who only accepted cash went into losses and some even shut down. On Inflation: The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) considers the Wholesale price index (WPI) and the Consumer Price Index (CPI) to measure inflation. Demonetisation is expected to reduce inflation as consumers have cut down on spending and aggregate demand has considerably fallen. According to government press releases, the official WPI for ‘All Commodities’ (Base: 2004-05=100) for the month of December, 2016 declined by 0.2 percent to 182.8 (provisional) from 183.1 (provisional) for the previous month. The index started rising during the month of January and rose by 1.0 percent to 184.6 (provisional) from 182.8 (provisional) for the previous month. This may be correlated with the availability of cash with people which led to increased spending. On Terror Funding: Demonetisation was aimed as a clean-up of the economy where Fake Indian Currency Notes (FICN) would be checked. It is aimed at rendering all fake notes of rupees 500 and 1000 useless and thus drastically affecting illegal funding of terror groups in Jammu and Kashmir, states in the North-East, and Naxalism-influenced states. On Political Parties: Many Political Parties use large amounts of undeclared cash to campaign for elections and meet other requirements. Due to Demonetisation such acts might get restricted to an extent and parties will have to formulate new strategies. Towards a Digital Economy: Absence of liquid cash has led to people making transactions using cheques or account transfers. They have also switched to virtual wallets like Paytm which allows electronic transfer of money. All this might result in a digital economy where transactions are being recorded and the economy has more white money. This might increase the government’s tax revenue. Quantitative Analysis Of The Impact Of Demonetisation On The Indian Economy As per the data published in hand book of statistics on Indian Economy by RBI, GDP at Market price fell approximately by 1 percent as compared to previous financial year. It registered a growth of 7.11 % from previous year as compared to the 8.01% growth witnessed during 2015-16. Table 1 indicates that GDP lost its growth streak of 4 years in the financial year 2016-17. GDP growth rate increased from 5.46% in 2012-13 to 8.01% in the year 2015-16. As per the estimates of the Central Statistics Office, all the sectors of the economy faced different situations in Q1 of the financial year 2017-18. According to these estimates, the GVA at constant prices in Q1 of 2017-18 was rupees 2904128 crores as compared to rupees 2751407 crores in the Q1 of the previous financial year. This shows a decline in growth from 7.6% in 2016-17 to 5.6% in 2017-18 (see table 2) Sectors in the economy such as Construction, Agriculture, Forestry & Fishing which employ a large number of daily wage workers and have liquidity preference witnessed a decline in growth. Agriculture grew by 2.3% in Q1 of 2017-18 as compared to 2.5% in Q1 of 2016-17, Construction grew at a rate of 2.3% in Q1 of 2017-18 and witnessed a drop of 0.2% since the Q1 of 2016-17. Manufacturing, which is the most important indicator of economic growth and employment has grown at a very slow rate post demonetisation. It grew by only 1.2% in Q1 of 2017-18 as compared to a massive growth of 10.7% in Q1 of 2016-17. Conclusion Demonetisation has been praised as well as criticised on various grounds. There has been a lot of opposition regarding the implementation of this policy. In the short run, there have been problems related to liquidity crunch, unemployment, loss of growth momentum, and a temporary halt to major economic activities. All this is evident from the data provided by the RBI. The long term effects of Demonetisation are yet to be ascertained. It is expected that it can improve the Indian economy in the long run by increasing tax compliance, financial inclusion, consequently improving the state of the economy. It can boost the GDP by increasing the availability of funds for lending and also by reducing transaction costs if the economy moves to digital modes of payments.

Cluster=5 What will be the positive and negative effects of demonization of ₹500/1000 notes on Indian economy? Narendra Modi government, in what many are calling a “ Surgical Strike on Black Money”, has made the Rupees 500 and 1000 currency notes (currently in circulation) as invalid or null after midnight of 8th November. Positives of this bold and unprecedented move are aplenty but let me try to play the Devil’s Advocate just to see the flip-side of the story (and also to answer the question): Inconvenience to Poor people: Most of the rural and urban poor in India are un-banked i.e. they don’t have bank accounts. (Precisely this the reason the Jan Dhan Scheme to open Bank accounts was launched, now we can see the other purpose of the scheme). These people- the migrant labourers, the landless workers, the potters, the contract labourers, the street vendors, rickshaw pullers,female workers keep the money stashed at their homes. Their life savings are in cash amount. They will face an uphill challenge to get the money converted into currency notes of valid denominations. They are not connected to banks or any formal channel of banking. No Identity proof may may be available which are required for exchanges above Rs 4000. It is even possible that there is no bank or post office nearby. Most of them will be afraid to go to banks and be nervous at this stage. They will have to spare a day’s work to go for re-encashment, hence loss of work. They may even face harassment at the hands of Bank officials to get the money exchanged. They may even have to pay bribes. 2. The Disadvantaged lot: Old people, disabled, sick, transgenders and prostitutes will be especially impacted. The above category of people will be deeply inconvenienced to go to banks to exchange their money. The transgenders and prostitutes keep all of their money in cash with themselves. Due to the inherent bias of the society they may choose not to go to banks themselves instead hire a middleman for this purpose who will not only charge for fees for their services and but also cheat a large amount. 3. Emergency Situations: People who need money for some urgent work like to see a doctor, pay hospital charges, medical emergency, travelling etc will be in a highly difficult situation as no one will accept their money (even if they have it) if in denominations of Rs 500 or 1000 notes. The ATMs and banks closed for two days, hence they will have no other resort (except of net-banking). Although the government has made provisions to minimize the inconvenience of these people- upto next 72 hours these notes will be accepted at Government agencies. But it may not suffice in majority of situations: in case of emergency, for example, one cannot choose to go to government hospital. 4. Impact on Households: It is an Indian thing in villages and small towns for housewives to keep their saved cash hidden away from their husbands and other family members. Invalidation of Rs 500 and 100o notes will jeopardize this scheme. Households with liquor problems will provide the husbands to seize control of the hidden cash. Also, general day to day purchase may be impacted due to lack of cash in hand. 5. Impact on Agriculture: The months of November and December are the season for sowing of Rabi crops (in most of India) and Samba crops in Tamil Nadu. This season requires a lot of cash in hand for purchasing seeds, pesticides, fertilizers, hiring labourers etc. All these activities will be severely hampered due to want of required cash. 6. The informal sector: Contract laborers in organised and un-organised sectors are paid their daily-wages in cash. Now the contractors can delay the wage payment for few days till things settle down. These laborers will have to face hardships for comings days since they live a life on hand to mouth earnings. 7. Gold: Now since the black money stored in cash gone in one shot, the corrupt may start saving their black money in some other easy investment to avoid any loss in future and the easiest option might be keeping them in gold and silver so that they can be en-cashed with ease in future. This may lead to increase in gold imports in long run. 8. Indian Economy: Most of the business in India has cash transaction with less than 2% business transactions taking place electronically. This move will cause severe cash crunch for both the customers and the sellers. Hence slow down the business in coming weeks. The small artisans and street vendors will be most impacted. The fast growing e-commerce segment which was made popular due to COD (Cash on Delivery) model will have slow business for few weeks. 9. Foreign travelers: Tourists in India will have to queue in banks to get the notes changed. Also, Indians who are on foreign visits may not be able to come back to India immediately, hence locking their money. 10 . Privacy may be lost: The financial situation (privacy) of families who store money in cash may be exposed to gaze of others, in the process of money exchange at banks risking their life situations For example: may lead to extortion and kidnapping in poor law and order districts. 11. Panic and awareness: There will be a panic like situation for many cash holders due to lack of awareness. Big rush conditions in banks and post offices may disrupt the other regular services of Banks and Post Offices like loan disbursal, postal services etc as most of the manpower will be utilized for this note exchange activity in the upcoming weeks. There can be many cases of cheating as well due to lack of knowledge and awareness of people. The above points are all short -term disadvantages, clearly indicating that the surprise and sudden nullification of Rs 500 and 100 notes is a master stoke by the NDA government which will cut deep into the black money and corruption market. Terrorist funding will be deeply pruned so will be the issue of FICN (Fake Indian Currency Note). This will encourage electronic transactions in future, thereby increasing the number of formal transaction increasing government revenue by way of taxes and curb fraudulent financial transactions. Advantages are a too many to cover here.

Cluster=6 PM Modi's demonetisation brings GDP down to 6.1 per cent: Top economists stand vindicated Barely six months after demonetisation, India's Gross Domestic Product or GDP growth rate has slumped down to 6.1 per cent in the January-March period, lowest in more than two years. This growth rate was unexpected as the Central Statistics Office earlier in January had estimated 7.1 per cent growth as compared to the 7.6 per cent in 2015-16. With this March quarter report, India lost its status as the world's fastest growing major economy. Read Also: Arun Jaitley defends GDP figures, demonetisation Last year, when the Prime Minister demonetised old Rs 500 and Rs 1000 currency notes it was feared that the country's economy would be severely hit. The opposition parties expressed their concerns over job loss and slow down in informal sector, but the government agencies maintained that impact would be short-term and marginal. Not only politicians but top-notched economists were also divided over the real effect of the demonetisation. Now that we know how note ban has brought down India's economic growth rate to 6.1 per cent, it's time to go over and see what the economists had predicted and how accurate they are. However, the real impact could be much more as 'India's statistical machinery does not capture data on the informal economy on a regular basis'. Fitch cut GDP growth rate to 6.9 per cent Global rating agency Fitch earlier in January had lowered its GDP growth forecasts for India to 6.9 per cent from 7.4 per cent saying there will be 'temporary disruptions' to economic activity post demonetisation. The new forecasts came a day before the central government released GDP numbers for the July-September quarter of fiscal 2016-17. HSBC predicted GDP growth down by 1 per cent Global financial services major HSBC released a report after demonetisation and said: "India's economic growth is expected to fall by up to 1 percentage points over the next 12 months in the wake of demonetisation, while longer-term gains will depend on follow-up reforms." "Using the cash elasticity of GDP, we estimate that over a year, economic growth can fall by 0.7-1.0 percentage points, with the maximum impact in the immediate two quarters, which will see a large contraction in 'effective' money supply," HSBC said in a research note. Dr Manmohan Singh predicted 2 per cent fall Former Prime Minister Dr Manmohan Singh slammed the demonetisation move and called it a 'monumental mismanagement' that might bring GDP down by 2 per cent. "In my opinion that the way the scheme has been implemented will hurt agricultural growth in our country, will hurt small industry, will hurt all those people who are in the informal sector of the economy. And my own feeling is that the national income, that is the GDP, can decline by about 2 per cent as a result of what has been done. This is an underestimate," Dr Singh said. Here's what other economists had to say Kaushik Basu Former Vice-President and Chief Economist of the World Bank Kaushik Basu had said that demonetisation's effect would be disastrous. "It (Demonetization) was poorly designed, with scant attention paid to the laws of the market, and it is likely to fail. So far its effects have been disastrous for the middle- and lower-middle classes, as well as the poor. And the worst may be yet to come," Basu wrote in The New York Times. In a recent article in the Indian Express, Basu again said demonetisation was 'a monetary policy blunder'. "India's GDP growth rate of around 7 per cent over 2016-17 is commendable; tribute goes to policy initiatives such as the GST and the new bankruptcy law. However, these policies, coupled with two global trends, should have propelled India to a growth rate of over 8 per cent, the kind it had achieved before 2008," Basu wrote. Amartya Sen Nobel laureate Amartya Sen said demonetisation was a gigantic mistake. He was speaking with India Today's Karan Thapar where he said: "It is a gigantic mistake, both in terms of its objective of dealing with corruption as well as the objective of one rapid jump of getting into a cashless economy." "I find no reasoning behind this decision. It will have adverse effects," he added. Arun Shourie Former economist at the World Bank Arun Shourie said demonetisation was the 'greatest blunder in economic policy for 70 years'. Speaking to NDTV, he said: "The stated objective of getting at black money, everybody would say is wonderful. But I don't think this is the strike, which has been well thought through. This is a strike not on black money. It is a strike on the legal tender of India, on the currency. It is a strike on cash transactions." Shourie further argued: "People who hold the black money or those who have black assets, they don't hold them in cash. One per cent of Indians hold 53 per cent of total assets in India. 10 per cent hold upto 85 per cent. Now these are the rich fellows, who will be having even larger proportion of the black money. They are not going to put the black money under the mattress." Kishore Mahbubani An Indian-origin academic and former Singapore diplomat Kishore Mahbubani said Indian economy would grow faster than China despite the temporary slowdown created by demonetisation. "Even if the demonetisation created a slowdown, it is not going to change the long-term momentum of where India is going with its economic growth," said Dean Kishore Mahbubani of the Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy at the National University of Singapore. "India will grow faster than China even after this (demonetisation) slow down. There is a lot of momentum in the Indian economy," Mahbubani further said.

Cluster=7 How demonetisation affected the Indian economy, in 10 charts New Delhi: A year ago, Prime Minister Narendra Modi announced the scrapping of high-value banknotes which amounted to 86% of currency in circulation. The demonetisation of currency notes was supposed to be an attack on black money, on counterfeit notes, and projected as part of a broader push to promote digitization and non-cash payments. A year later, progress on all these counts appears to be very modest, and should make us question whether this exercise was needed at all to fulfil its stated aims. The costs imposed by the currency-scrapping exercise were, however, quite severe, at least in the short term, disrupting ordinary life across the country for several weeks. The hardest-hit were those in rural areas, where access to banking and the internet are quite low. A 2016 Reserve Bank of India (RBI) report on branch authorization policy classified 93% of rural centres in the country as unbanked, with the population dependent on roving banking correspondents and on distant urban or semi-urban branches. Access to the internet is equally patchy, with only 3% of households in underdeveloped rural areas reporting access to internet in a 2016 consumer economy survey. Click here for enlarge Economic costs The rural and informal economy suffered disproportionately because most transactions are cash-based. The liquidity squeeze led to a pile-up at wholesale markets, leading to a sharp decline in the Wholesale Price Index (WPI) of perishables such as fruits and vegetables in the immediate aftermath of demonetisation. By turning farm markets into buyers’ markets, demonetisation may have also contributed to the decline in prices of pulses. Rural consumer sentiment too took a hit, with domestic sales of two-wheelers plunging sharply. Car sales also declined but the decline was less severe than in the case of two-wheelers. The slowdown in the economy, which started before demonetisation, also seems to have been exacerbated by demonetisation. New project announcements declined sharply in the wake of demonetisation, a Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy (CMIE) analysis showed, hurting the capex cycle. Contrary to what some economists predicted, the dividend from RBI to the government was lower because of demonetisation. RBI’s domestic earnings declined as it had to pay interest of Rs17,426 crore after it mopped up excess liquidity in the banking system following demonetisation. The previous year, the central bank had earned interest of Rs506 crore in its liquidity management operations. RBI’s printing costs also went up because of the move. Click here for enlarge Uncertain benefits The one big promise of demonetisation was a rapid expansion in the tax base but the actual results have been quite modest. According to the finance ministry’s estimates published in the latest Economic Survey, the tax base expansion attributable to demonetisation was Rs10,600 crore, lower than what RBI spent on interest expenses, and equivalent to only 0.1% of India’s gross domestic product (GDP). The full effect on tax collections “will materialize gradually” as reported income of new taxpayers grows, said the survey. How far such gains materialize remains to be seen. Another stated aim of demonetisation was to detect and eliminate counterfeit notes. The growth in detected counterfeit notes after demonetisation has not been unusually large, shows RBI data, even as counterfeits of the freshly issued notes have already emerged in the system. Demonetisation did provide a boost to non-cash payments in the short term but that effect may be waning, with the cash-to-GDP ratio back to double-digits. There seems to have been some impact on the stock of black money (rather than the flow), given that the construction sector has been hit hard. But this may also have led to large-scale job losses. The proportion of high-value notes (Rs500 and above)—often viewed as conduits of black money—has also been rising as new notes have entered the system. At the end of fiscal year 2017 (FY17), the proportion of high-value notes stood at 74%, considerably lower than that in FY16. But this figure may rise significantly by the end of FY18.

Cluster=8 Indian Currency Demonetization: Advantages and Disadvantages The government of India recently took a bold step to demonetize Rs 500 and Rs 1000 currency, which means that the legal tender of currency units is declared invalid from the specified date. Demonetization of currency means discontinuity of the said currency from circulation and replacing it with a new currency. Most of the people hailed the Modi's strong decision, while poor were shocked by the move. The overnight decision changed the life of many as black money holders were worried about the pile of cash they were sitting on. Many poor daily wage workers were left with no job and income as owners were unable to pay their daily wage. It is no doubt a bold step taken by the government which will definitely help India to become corruption-free. Here are some advantages and disadvantages of de-monetization: [Image: Black Money tracking] Black Money tracking This move will help the government to track unaccounted black money or cash on which income tax has not been paid. Individuals who are sitting on a pile of cash usually do not deposit the amount in the bank or invest anywhere as they would be required to show income or submit PAN for any valid financial transactions. They would hide it somewhere and use it as and when necessary. Banning high-value currency will impact people who will have no option, but, to declare income and pay tax on the same or destroy the cash somehow. Now, it is not possible to hide the money as the notes have been declared invalid. [Image: Reduction in illegal activity] Reduction in illegal activity Banning high-value currency will halt illegal activity as the cash provided for such activities has no value now. Black money is usually used to fund the illegal activity, terrorism, and money laundering. Fake currency circulation will come to a halt in a single shot. Corrupt officers, money launderers are under threat as Income tax department is taking all the measures to track such people. [Image: Tax payment] Tax payment Most of the businessmen who have been hiding some income are ready to pay advance tax as current year's income. Tax payers who have been hiding some income can come forward to declare income and pay tax on the same. Individuals are required to submit PAN for any deposit above Rs 50,000 in cash, which will help tax department to track individuals with high denominations. Also, deposit up to Rs 2.5 lakh will not come under Income tax scrutiny. [Image: Jan Dhan Yojana] Jan Dhan Yojana Now individuals are depositing enough cash in their Jan Dhan accounts which they were reluctant to do so a few days back. The amount deposited can be used for the betterment of the country. [Image: Disadvantages of Currency Demonetization ] Disadvantages of Currency Demonetization It may cause inconvenience for initial few days for those who have to start running to the banks to exchange notes, deposit amount or withdraw the same. The situation can turn chaotic if there is a delay in the circulation of new currency. Individuals who have an upcoming wedding are the ones who have to make alternative arrangements to make payments. However, the government has given higher withdrawal limit in such cases. [Image: Cost of currency destruction] Cost of currency destruction After the news, we have seen that many individuals have burnt their cash and discarded the same, which is a loss to the economy. The government has to bear the cost of printing of new currency and its circulation. It makes sense when benefits of demonetization are higher. The cost of currency printing is a burden on the tax payers and is one of the many disadvantages of de-monetization. [Image: Conclusion ] Conclusion There are only advantages of demonetization in the long term. The government is taking all the necessary steps and actions to meet the currency demand and ensure the smooth flow of new currency. [Image: New notes now in circulation] New notes now in circulation We now have new notes in circulation with denomination of Rs 2,000 for the very first time. There are also new Rs 500 notes in circulation, which are very thin and have great security features. So, now there is whole lot of new currency that is in circulation. There are also plans to include new currency in other smaller denominations, especially Rs 100. In any case, nobody seems to be unduly worried now that the entire demonetization episode and the time frame to exchange the old notes now stands completed. RBI on demonetization The government had announced demonetization of Rs 1000 and Rs 500 note on November 8, 2016. A demonetization is a tool useful for eradication of black money. After demonetization of Rs 1000 and Rs 500, the government introduced new Rs 500 but not Rs 1000. Instead of Rs 1000, the new Rs 2000 introduced not only these the RBI printed new RS 200 notes. Many now argue that the process of demonetization had little impact on balck money, given that 99 per cent of the notes were surrendered back to the bank. The cash ban had forced the RBI to print new notes and in new denominations.

Cluster=9 Demonetization DEFINITION of 'Demonetization' Demonetization is the act of stripping a currency unit of its status as legal tender. It occurs whenever there is a change of national currency: The current form or forms of money is pulled from circulation and retired, often to be replaced with new notes or coins. Sometimes, a country completely replaces the old currency with new currency. The opposite of demonetization is remonetization, in which a form of payment is restored as legal tender. BREAKING DOWN 'Demonetization' There are multiple reasons why nations demonetize their local units of currency: to combat inflation to combat corruption and crime (counterfeiting, tax evasion) to discourage a cash-dependent economy to facilitate trade Dramatic Examples of Demonetization The Coinage Act of 1873 demonetized silver as the legal tender of the United States, in favor of fully adopting the gold standard. Several coins, including two-cent piece, three-cent piece, and half dime were discontinued. The withdrawal of silver from the economy resulted in a contraction of the money supply, which subsequently led to a five-year economic depression throughout the country. In response to the dire situation and pressure from farmers and silver miners and refiners, the Bland-Allison Act remonetized silver as legal tender in 1878. An example of demonetization for trade purposes occurred when the nations of the European Union officially began to use the euro as their everyday currencies in 2002. When the physical euro bills and coins were introduced, the old national currencies, such as the German mark, the French franc and the Italian lira were demonetized. However, these varied currencies remained convertible into Euros at fixed exchange rates for a while to assure a smooth transition. In 2015, the Zimbabwean government demonetized its dollar as a way to combat the country’s hyperinflation, which was recorded at 231,000,000%. The three-month process involved expunging the Zimbabwean dollar from the country’s financial system and solidifying the U.S. dollar, the Botswana pula and the South African rand as the country’s legal tender in a bid to stabilize the economy. India's Demonetization In 2016, the Indian government decided to demonetize the 500- and 1000- rupee notes, the two biggest denominations in its currency system; these notes accounted for 86% of the country’s circulating cash. With little warning, India's Prime Minister Narendra Modi announced to the citizenry on Nov. 8 that those notes were worthless, effective immediately – and they had until the end of the year to deposit or exchange them for newly introduced 2000 rupee and 500 rupee bills. Chaos ensued in the cash-dependent economy (some 78% of all Indian customer transactions are in cash), as long, snaking lines formed outside ATMs and banks, which had to shut down for a day. The new rupee notes have different specifications, including size and thickness, requiring re-calibration of ATMs: only 60% of the country’s 200,000 ATMs were operational. Even those dispensing bills of lower denominations faced shortages. The government’s restriction on daily withdrawal amounts added to the misery, though a waiver on transaction fees did help a bit. Small businesses and households struggled to find cash and reports of daily wage workers not receiving their dues surfaced. The rupee fell sharply against the dollar. The government’s goal (and rationale for the abrupt announcement) was to combat India's thriving underground economy on several fronts: eradicate counterfeit currency, fight tax evasion (only 1% of the population pays taxes), eliminate black money gotten from money laundering and terrorist-financing activities, and to promote a cashless economy. Individuals and entities with huge sums of black money gotten from parallel cash systems were forced to take their large-denomination notes to a bank, which was by law required to acquire tax information on them. If the owner could not provide proof of making any tax payments on the cash, a penalty of 200% of the owed amount was imposed. Alternative Funds Soon after the announcement, people rushed to buy gold, a demand that drove prices up, in some cases even to a 60% premium, prompting the tax authorities to conduct surveys, according to the Business Standard newspaper. The government emphasized the need to furnish PAN (Indian Permanent Account Number) card details on purchases for accountability purposes, and many jewelry shops that were flouting the norms came under crackdowns. Simultaneously, rumors of a gold ban started to float, which led to agencies ramping up the volume of gold imports – to around 100 metric tons during November, the highest since 2015, as reported by Reuters. Many Indians switched to alternative payment avenues – a big deal in a country of 1.2 billion with only 25.9 million credit cards and 697 million ATM cards as of July 2016. The biggest gainers were mobile wallet companies that offer ease of transactions through a large network of partners. Alibaba (NYSE:BABA)-backed Paytm saw a sevenfold increase in overall traffic and a 10-fold jump in money added to Paytm accounts. It also saw the number of transactions double to five million a day. App downloads for Paytm increased by 300%. Paytm rival MobiKwik also saw its app downloads quadruple and a 20-fold increase in money added to the wallets, MobiKwik Founder & CEO Bipin Preet Singh, told CNBC-TV18 on November 13. Prepaid cash cards were another option that customers found useful, and that meant good news for companies like ItzCash. Other alternatives include mobile payments systems linked to e-commerce businesses like Ola Money, FreeCharge, Flipkart Wallet. Ola Money, the payment portal for popular transportation app Ola Cabs, reported a 1500% jump in money added to the accounts in less than four hours. Interest in Bitcoin also spiked: Sandeep Geonka, co-founder of Zebpay, told Investopedia that his bitcoin exchange was now adding about 50,000 new users per month. "We are seeing an increased demand for bitcoin and India clearly has shortage of supply, making the demand and lack of liquidity push up prices of bitcoin as compared to global exchanges,” said Coinsecure CEO Mohit Kalra. The virtual currency was trading at INR 55,735 in India in November (about $836), compared INR 47,725 (about $712) (Coindesk) elsewhere. Long-Term Effects Over 3 trillion rupees, or over $44 billion in old currency, was deposited with Indian banks in just the first week after the demonetization. There was concern that the uncertainty and short-term liquidity squeeze would take some momentum off the Indian economy, the fastest-growing in the world; in particular, sectors like real estate, notorious as a harbor for cash dealings and black money, were expected to take a hit, with "luxury property prices dipping by as much as 25-30%," said Ashwinder Raj Singh, CEO of Residential Services, JLL India. But experts believed any slowdown would only be short-lived once the systems adjusted to the new normal, especially if the government heeded calls to lower interest rates by groups like the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI). Credit rating agency India Ratings & Research maintained its GDP growth forecast for India at 7.8% for FY17, albeit with a downward bias.

Cluster=10 Demonetisation: Nearly 99% of Scrapped Notes Came Back into System Roughly 89 million of the 6.7 billion Rs 1,000 notes in existence were not deposited following demonetisation and still remain in circulation. Credit: PTI New Delhi: The Reserve Bank of India on Wednesday released the much-awaited numbers behind the Modi government’s demonetisation exercise. The result? Rs 15.28 lakh crore out of the Rs 15.44 lakh crore in currency that was rendered invalid on November 8, 2016 has come back into the Indian banking system. This means that 98.96% of Rs 1,000 and Rs 500 notes that were banned as a result of demonetisation were returned to the central bank by the end of June 2017. The central bank however does caution that it is still in the process of checking and verifying soiled and questionable bank notes. “Subject to future corrections based on verification process when completed, the estimated value of SBNs received on June 30, 2017 is Rs 15.28 lakh crore,” the central bank states. The numbers come as part of the RBI’s annual report, which also shows that out of the 6.7 billion Rs 1,000 notes, 89 million notes are still in circulation and therefore have not come back into the system. “The value of banknotes in circulation declined by 20.2% over the year to Rs 13,102 billion as at end-March 2017. The volume of banknotes, however, increased by 11.1%, mainly due to higher infusion of banknotes of lower denomination in circulation following the demonetisation,” the RBI notes. On November 8, 2016, the Modi government kicked off a massive demonetisation exercise in a move that was aimed at curbing black money, fake currency and corruption. Since then it has been a widely debated topic, with analysts and economists wondering whether the benefits trumped the costs. In the immediate weeks after demonetisation, one school of thought believed that if a sizeable amount of demonetisation notes didn’t return to the RBI (presumably because the owners of the notes feared getting caught for tax evasion, this could translate into a “windfall gain” for the Modi government. The government itself believed that roughly Rs 2 -3 lakh crore would not return, according to statements the-then attorney general made before the Supreme Court in November 2016. With 99% of demonetised notes coming back, this no longer seems likely. How have, in value terms the Rs 500 and Rs 2,000 banknotes fared? “In value terms, the share of 500 and above banknotes, which had together accounted for 86.4% of the total value of banknotes in circulation at end-March 2016, stood at 73.4% at end-March 2017. The share of newly introduced 2000 banknotes in the total value of banknotes in circulation was 50.2% at end-March 2017. In volume terms, 10 and 100 banknotes constituted 62.0% of total banknotes in circulation at end-March 2017 as compared with 53.0% at end-March 2016,” the annual report notes. Nepal, Bhutan factors Currently, there is Rs 16,000 crore, in the form of demonetised Rs 500 and Rs 1,000 notes, that haven’t made their way back into the Indian banking system. As The Wire has reported in the past, a certain amount of these banknotes are in India’s neighbouring countries. In Bhutan and Nepal in particular, Indian rupees are used more often than not as a valid form of currency. In Bhutan, the total amount of Indian rupee notes deposited by locals was Rs 1.60 billion or Rs 160 crore as per the country’s central bank. Although news reports have indicated that the country holds Rs 3,000 crore worth of banned Indian currency, the sourcing of this figure is not clear. As The Wire has reported, Indian rupees do account for 30% of Bhutan’s foreign exchange reserves (roughly Rs 37 billion or 3,700 crore), it’s not clear whether this is held in the form of Rs 500 and Rs 1,000 notes. When it comes to Nepal, the situation is a little more complex. Although Indian news reports have identified Nepalese citizens has holding an estimated Rs 3,200 crore, sources tell The Wire that Nepal is yet to come up with an accurate estimate on the total number of Indian banknotes in the country. “The factual position right now is that RBI and NRB [Nepal’s central bank] have yet to reach a decision,” a senior government official told The Wire. Cost of printing The central bank also states that the total expenditure incurred on printing bank notes for the year July 2016- June 2017 was Rs 79.65 billion as opposed to Rs 34.2 billion during 2015-16. “The upsurge in expenditure during the year was on account of change in the production plan of printing presses due to the introduction of new design notes in higher denominations as well as the requirement of larger volume of notes for replacement of the demonetised currency,” the report states. What does 99% of currency coming back mean? If Rs 15.28 lakh crore out of Rs 15.44 lakh crore has come back into the system what does this mean for black money? According to analysts, there are two broad explanations. One, the proportion of black money that was held in the form of cash was quite low. Or two, the proportion of Rs 500 and Rs 1,000 notes that was black money has been successfully laundered back into the system. *Includes RBI-regulated eight All-India Financial Institutions, insurance companies, housing finance institutions, non-banking financial companies, chit-funds etc. **Includes intermediaries registered with SEBI, viz., stock brokers, merchant bankers, portfolio managers, foreign institutional investors, etc. Another inference from most of the money returning is that the I-T department has a lot of work ahead of itself in analysing the money has returned. As seen from the table above, the RBI does note that the amount of “suspicious transactions” reported by various financial institutions in India has increased sharply. Banks alone reported 3,61,214 suspicious transactions in 2016-17. However, it remains to be seen whether this will translate into solid tax evasion cases or convictions. Fake and counterfeit notes, a reckoning Another much-touted advantage of demonetisation is that would help curb the amount of fake currency in circulation – fake currency that the Modi government believed helped anti-social elements engage in criminal activities. Niti Aayog member and economist Bibek Debroy, in the months after demonetisation, claimed that the total value of counterfeit or fake Indian currency was in the range of Rs 2,000 crore. This figure was fact-checked by The Wire at the time. The RBI notes that the “detection of counterfeit notes increased across denominations – notably, Rs 500 and Rs 1,000 – during 2016-17”. As can be seen from the table above, in 2015-16, roughly 143,099 ‘Rs 1,000 notes’ were detected as fake or counterfeit. This shot up to 256,324 in 2016-17. The total value of fake notes discovered over the last year was Rs 41 crore – a far cry from the Rs 2,000 crore figure that Debroy claims is still circulating in the Indian economy. A note circulated by SBI chief economist Soumya Kanti Ghosh notes that while increased detection of counterfeit notes is heartening, its still disappointing. “On a positive note, the detection of counterfeit old 500 and 1000 denomination notes has witnessed an increase of 42% in 2017. However, the value of such notes is a minuscule Rs 41 crore,” Ghosh states.

Cluster=11 99% of demonetised notes returned, says RBI report The Reserve Bank of India’s annual report has finally revealed that as much as ₹15.28 lakh crore of the high-value currency that was demonetised in November returned to the central bank. “Subject to future corrections, based on the verification process when completed, the estimated value of SBNs [specified bank notes] received as on June 30, 2017, is ₹15.28 trillion,” the RBI said in a report released on Wednesday. Intense scrutiny The central bank was under intense scrutiny since January — after the window for depositing the withdrawn ₹500 and ₹1,000 banknotes had closed — for details on the extent of currency that was returned to the RBI in the wake of the government’s sudden decision to withdraw high-value banknotes as a means to combating counterfeiting, black money and the financing of terrorist activities. ALSO READ Shame on RBI for recommending demonetisation: Chidambaram The latest RBI data showed that 98.96% of the withdrawn currency — at the time of demonetisation the value of old ₹500 and ₹1,000 notes in circulation was ₹15.44 lakh crore — was deposited with the banks. Separately, the data showed that the share of the newly introduced ₹2,000 banknotes in the total value of currency in circulation was 50.2% at end-March 2017. Finance Minister Arun Jaitley said on Wednesday that the confiscation of money was never the objective of the demonetisation exercise. “That people have been compelled to deposit even black money into banks is itself a good evidence of its [success].” graphJPG Mr. Jaitley said that the high growth in income tax returns and the robust GST inflows indicated that more and more people now preferred to undertake ‘white money’ transactions. ALSO READ Objective of demonetisation was not confiscation of money, says Arun Jaitley “With RBI disclosing the numbers of returned notes today [Wednesday] and the measure having been successfully implemented, the debate should be over,” said Economic Affairs Secretary Subhash Garg. Mr. Garg called for a conclusion of note-ban linked arguments as the “short-term negative impacts on economic activity had played out fully and long-term positives will continue to strengthen fundamentals.” The final deposit figures could still rise since on June 20, 2017, the government allowed District Central Cooperative Banks to deposit the withdrawn notes that had been accepted by them from customers between November 10-14. The central bank also said it was in discussion with the government whether to accept the demonetised notes held by citizens and financial institutions in Nepal. Data in the annual report showed that only 89 million pieces of ₹1,000 were not deposited. The politics of demonetisation As of March 2016, there were 6,326 million pieces of ₹1,000 banknotes in circulation. In 2016-2017, another 925 million pieces of ₹1,000 notes were supplied into the system by the currency printing presses.

Cluster=12 India’s history with demonetisation: From 1946 to 2016 The whole country was taken aback when Prime Minister Narendra Modi on November 8 announced that the currencies in the denominations of Rs 500 and Rs 1,000 will be invalid post midnight. However, the lower denomination –Rs 10, Rs 20, Rs 50, Rs 100 and coins –will be valid. He further announced that new notes of Rs 500 and Rs 2,000 would introduce shortly. Thus, giving millions of Indians a panic attack. But what do you think was this the first time an Indian currency was banned of a sudden? Well, the answer is NO. A look into the past will make you realise that India is no new to demonetisation. Demonetisation has been implemented twice -1946 and 1978 – in the past. [Image: rs-1000_1938] Image Source The first currency ban: In 1946, the currency note of Rs 1,000 and Rs 10,000 were removed from circulation. The ban really did not have much impact, as the currency of such higher denomination was not accessible to the common people. However, both the notes were reintroduced in 1954 with an additional introduction of Rs 5,000 currency. Rs 500 and Rs 1000 notes were introduce in 1934 and after four years in 1938, Rs 10,000 notes were introduce. [Image: rs-5000_1978] Image Source The second: That came in 1978; the then Prime Minister of India Morarji Desai announced the currency ban taking Rs 1000, Rs 5000 and Rs 10,000 out of circulation. The sole aim of the ban was to curb black money generation in the country. Similarities in 1978 and 2016 ban: The note ban by Morarji Desai also aimed to drive away black money out of circulation in the economy. Hence, The High Denomination Bank Notes (Demonestisation) Act was implemented. Narendra Modi announced the currency ban is an address that was broadcasted across all news channels. Similarly, Desai announced the ban over the radio after which the banks were closed the following day. Both the affairs were kept confidential. Differences in the ban: Unlike Modi, Desai didn’t have the backing of the RBI Governor. The Governor I.G. Patel believed that the ban was implemented simply to immobilize the funds of the opposition party. Patel also believed that people never store black money in the form of currency for too long. It didn’t have much effect on the people and affected only the privilege few. While the recent ban had shaken the whole country. Coming back to 2016, there is also a buzz that smaller denomination currency notes like Rs 50 and Rs 100 will also be replaced by incorporating new features and design. And that reminds us of an incident dating back to early 70s, when there were rumours of withdrawing Rs 100 note from circulation, and immediately hoards of people were seen rushing to banks to exchange their Rs 10 and Rs 20 currencies.

Cluster=13 India’s demonetized currency finds its way back into the system — but can we still call it a success? India’s demonetized currency finds its way back into the system — but can we still call it a success? India's demonetization policy failed to purge black money from the market, but analysts still view it as a success. Prime Minister Narendra Modi's BJP party saw a resounding electoral win in March, following implementation. The program has improved tax returns and encourage digital payments, figures suggest. India's demonetized currency may have found its way back into the system but analysts suggest that far from tarnishing Prime Minister Narendra Modi's image, the strategy will ultimately be viewed as a success. div > div.group > p:first-child"> "It's important to remember that the demonetization move was intended more as a political move than as an economic one," noted New York-based South Asia-focused Eurasia Group analyst Sasha Riser-Kositsky. "The drama of demonetization allowed Prime Minister Narendra Modi to demonstrate in a very visible way his commitment to fighting corruption and black money." Earlier this week, the annual report from the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), the country's central bank, found that a total of 15.28 trillion rupees ($239 billion) worth of cancelled high-value notes were deposited or exchanged for new money in the 10 months since the strategy was implemented – just one percent shy of the number in circulation before the plans came in. The results suggest a damning failure for Modi and his flagship policy. In November last year, Modi announced the radical step to demonetize the currency notes in order to tackle the rampant problem of the so-called black money – billions of dollars' worth of cash in unaccounted wealth and fake currency notes. The government decided to introduce a new 500 rupee note and also introduce a higher denomination banknote of 2,000 rupees. Opponents hit out at Modi and accused him of damaging the economy and tarnishing the country's credibility at home and abroad. First quarter gross domestic product (GDP) data released Thursday marked a three-year-low of 5.7 percent, versus 7.9 percent the year before. The RBI had to spend 79.65 billion rupees on quickly printing updated replacements for the 500 rupee ($7) and 1,000 rupee notes which were abruptly banned at midnight on November 8 last year, according to the central bank's annual report. show chapters [Image: How to build a cashless society? Give people no other choice] How to build a cashless society? Give people no other choice 11:45 AM ET Fri, 11 Aug 2017 04:08 Meanwhile cash-dependent small businesses and poorer citizens – those Modi had claimed to be helping – have been badly hurt by note-shortages this year. Prior to the data release, it was unclear how successful Modi's policy had been, and as such his political motives were enough to win him favor with India's vast segment of poorer voters at the polls. His Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) won overwhelming support in March elections in Uttar Pradesh, India most populous and one of its poorest states. "The government and its supporters can argue that even if demonetization failed to remove black money from circulation, that at least Modi and the government tried to do something about it," Riser-Kositsky told CNBC via email. But politics aside, analysts claim that the economic benefits will emerge over time. "The demonetisation campaign clearly contributed to economic slowdown, reflected in poor GDP figures in April-June. In hindsight, this can be deemed a failure from an economic point of view," Firat Unlu, leading India analyst at the Economist Intelligence Unit, told CNBC. "Still, assuming that demonetisation is complemented by efforts to enhance tax compliance, then some success can be salvaged and lead to higher government revenue." [Image: An Indian bank employee counts old 500 and 1000 rupee notes in Guwahati, the capital city of the north-eastern state of Assam on December 30, 2016.] Biju Boro AFP Getty Images An Indian bank employee counts old 500 and 1000 rupee notes in Guwahati, the capital city of the north-eastern state of Assam on December 30, 2016. As a result of demonetization, and in tandem with Modi's 'Digital India' strategy, which aims to expand India's online infrastructure, the country now sits on a treasure trove of data. The government has been gradually making enrolment to its national electronic database 'Aadhaar' mandatory for tax returns, opening of bank accounts and any purchases above 50,000 rupees. It is estimated that over 99 percent of Indians aged 18 and above are now enrolled in the scheme. This means that the government can expect to see the benefits of taxation on previously hidden black money over the coming months and years. India's finance ministry says it is probing 1.8 million bank accounts where cash inflows during the demonetization period "did not appear in line with its tax profile," meaning it can expect some belated tax payments. "There are also long-term benefits from demonetization in terms of increasing income tax payments going forward and encouraging the use of digital payments over cash, a means of encouraging better tax compliance among businesses," Riser-Kositsky explained. However, whether it is a model to be replicated by other countries struggling to combat corruption and illicit money is not yet clear. For Unlu, the initial economic fallout may be too much for other economies to stomach. "On balance, governments abroad are unlikely to replicate India's experiment given the economic fallout," he said. Traditionally, other governments have only embarked on demonetization schemes in times of extreme need, such as hyperinflation, political upheaval and wars.

Cluster=14 Positive and Negative effects of demonization of ₹500/1000 notes on Indian economy Now this is the mother of all headlines. PM Modi has just addressed the Country and announced that Rs 500 and Rs 1000 notes will be ceased to legal tender from the midnight ( 8 Nov, 2016). It means, these notes will not be accepted in legal transactions. Black money holders baldly busted. Nature of repel in the water is, it spreads in both the direction. It is a law of nature. In the same way, every action has both negative and positive aspects. But its upto us to decide what is more important. Human brain is more creative in focusing on negative aspects at first. Its not bad as it keeps us alert for the possible adverse conditions. So let us discuss the negative effects first. Negative Effects As government has announced it in a hastiness, it may effect its execution. Allow withdrawal from ATM is upto Rs. 2500 and from bank its Rs 10000 only. Long queues will not allow a person to get money on time. It will be a little difficult for a family person to survive with this amount. The Average Population per Bank Branch (APBB) as on 31.3.2013 stands at 12,100 (source). Government has given us 50 days to deposit all our cash money into our bank accounts. Lets say 40 days are working out of 50. It means, on banks have to deal with average of 300 people daily. Yes, I agree that this number includes every living human being (children, senior citizens, women), so you can say that this number will reduce on practical scale. But wait, what about people who will come along? What about people who will come repeatedly, or I can say, daily? What about people who have to come again due to closing time or any other reason? This number will surely exceed. Believe me, public dealing is a very tough job and when you have 300 hassled brains in front of you, it becomes horrible. Running out of Money: Though, everyone needs new currency notes, it is very hard to provide cash on time, even by RBI. Because, there is a limit on printing currency notes. Government just can’t order RBI to print new notes as per requirement. There is a regulatory system which guides RBI and Indian government how much new currency notes should be printed other country has to face some serious issues like, inflation. So, government will not be able to provide enough money to banks to pass on to consumers. It will create uncertainty. Empty ATM’s: Same as bank branches, queues on ATM’s will also have to face same fate. Standing in long queues and returning with nothing will not please anyone. Patients: Government hospitals have been allowed to accept old Rs 500 and Rs 1000 notes. According to National Family Health Survey-3, the private medical sector remains the primary source of health care for 70% of households in urban areas and 63% of households in rural areas. So its easy to understand that what will be the effects on these 63% and 70% patients. White Into Black: As Indian, we do believe in cash. Even if our money is purely white, we go to bank, withdraw some money and go for shopping. Cheques and ATM swipes are not available everywhere. Like, if someone in family is hospitalized or, have marriage in house, we do withdraw our cash and feel comfortable. So, whatever the reason is, if someone has withdrawn a decent amount from his account then it will create a huge problem for him to prove himself innocent. So, in this case, instead of converting black money into white, a person has accidentally converted his white money into black. Patience of People: Considering all of the above points (and many more in the line), it will need a superman effort from a common man to keep his patience in balance. Any outburst in the tolerance of people will make the situation more terrible. Though, for now, people are more in favor of respected PM because right now they are not suffers. But when they will face hurdles in their routine jobs due to shortage of money then it will be their patience which will make this historic move a success story. Downfall in Economy: Though, it will be a very temporary effect, but for the next few months, there will be a visible effect on economy due to the decreased purchased capacity of consumers. Worst effects will be on startups and medium sized companies and firms. Positive Effects Foreign Trust: Transparency is always welcomed, specially in business. It is the most important gradient for foreign investors. Everyone like to have their money in safe hands. Black money is a major factor in India which inhibits the rapid growth in private sector. When a company decides to invest in a product they can calculate almost every kind of expenditure they will have to face except bribe. Ratan Tata has shown his irritation about corruption and bribe many times. So decreased black money will surely help Indian government to gain trust from foreign investors. Lubrication in Circulation: Money is the lubrication that makes the market economy possible. A large portion of this lubricant was immobilized in the form of black money. Rs 500 and Rs 1000 shares a major part. Due to this immobilization government is bound to circulate more currency notes in the market to keep it running. In simple terms, say, government gives you 100 potatoes to distribute in the market. Instead of distributing all, you circulate only 80 pieces. Rest you preserve for your own benefits. Now for the fulfilment of the requirement, government will provide you 20 more potatoes, out of them you circulate only 16 and this keeps going on. Government have to invest more to fulfill the need and you will eat more as compare to others. Here, ‘you’ refers to market. This cause inflation. Now imagine, somehow government raids on you and liberates all the stored stock of potatoes. Surely stock will be huge which will help government to fulfill the need without any expense. It can distribute the extra potatoes to those who require the most. Now, replace potatoes by money and imagine the outcomes. Hard Money to Digital Money: Though, it is the first of its kind, but we may have to face these surgical strikes on black money in the future too. This will give some time to people to understand the need of digital money in the current era. We have seen some inspiring pictures where vegetable seller is accepting money via PayTm. India is changing. New Hope: Black money was a key agenda for BJP during election campaigns. But people were disappointed when there was no major step taken by the current government. Now when PM Modi has declared the demonetization of Rs 500 and Rs 1000 notes, a positive vibe has been spread through out the country. Zero Counterfeit Notes: In India, the circulation of fake Indian currency notes (FICN) has been on the rise, according to the Reserve Bank of India’s (RBI) annual reports. The year 2014-2015 saw a steep rise, with 594,446 FICN detected, up from 488,273 in the year 2013-14. When it comes to the type of notes counterfeited in 2014-15, RBI data showed that counterfeited Rs 500 notes were most common, with 273,923 recorded. Rs 100 and Rs 1000 notes were the second and third most counterfeited bills, respectively (source). Most of the FICN are printed in Pakistan. Major transit points include India’s neighboring countries Nepal and Bangladesh. Other transit routes includes Dubai, Thailand, Malaysia, Sri Lanka and China (source). Now all this FICN is equal to ZERO. Rein on Terrorism: The ISI has been making a profit of 30-40% on the face value of each counterfeit Indian note produced in Pakistan, according to the report. The cost of printing a Rs 1,000 counterfeit note, for instance, is Rs 39 (the RBI spends Rs 29 to print a Rs 1,000 note), but it is sold at Rs 350-400, according to the report. It is a measure source of funding for these terrorist groups. Now all these funding will be equal to ZERO. Increased Income Tax Revenue: It would be an exaggeration to say that all black money holders will deposit all of their stored cash into bank accounts. But they will also not let their hard-earned cash to become worthless paper. And whatever they will do it will convert their black money into white, at least for once. Someone is surely going to pay income tax on that amount. It will drastically increase the revenue generated from tax. Deflation: Deflation refers to situation, where there is decline in general price levels. It increases the real value of money and allows one to buy more goods with the same amount of money over time. All of the above mentioned points will lead to the decrease in inflation which will automatically increase deflation rate. Goods will be cheaper and facilities will be in the range of poor people. Here is an example. If we somehow try to manage short-term discomfort which we all are going to face in the coming days then positive aspects are really great to consider. Everything is fair in love and war. Its a war against Corruption and love for our Country. Do you think PM Modi's decision will help end Black Money? There is a public poll on discontinuing Rs. 500, 1000 Notes. The poll just has one question and takes only a couple of seconds to complete. Please let people know your response on this step.

Cluster=15 Demonetization In India: A Boon Or A Bane For The Common Man It came as a surprise to everybody after our PM Narendra Modi declared on trashing the 500 and 1000 rupees notes. PM’s move on banning the respective notes certainly may be the ray of hope to sweep out corruption and a boon to every tax-payer. The attempt to wipe out black money and corruption might be rigid, however was it really a well-planned move? Most of them had this question in mind as they were unaware of the reason behind such a drastic change. Usually skeptical to changes is typical among Indians. However, let me point out few reasons which were the positive part of this decision was1) To stop the funds that were transferred by terrorists, 2) Put an end to the circulation of fake currency notes, 3) Wiping off the corruption of black money 4) Bring up the indian economy for a better tomorrow including real-estate and gold where most black money were grounded 5) Digitalization being the forte (pic: feegenie) Digitalizing India to have a cashless policy where every Indian would either use online transactions or swipe their card for the smallest of uses. This will help in maintaining harmony and discipline among people and the crocodiles out there to fill the country with filth would step back from corruption. Although the Constitution has many loopholes, which in turn could backfire this attempt, as we have other ruling parties that may unite to stand against the good cause as it involves the government. The government did not pay heed to the fact that they may not be in power by the next elections, still took a step towards a better tomorrow. (pic: The New Indian Express) Aiming at combating corruption or black money, short-term problems and chaos spread among the working class; especially those that deal with cash on a daily basis. During this change, most of the working class people had to stand in queues to withdraw a basic minimum amount of cash from banks or ATMs, where many small businesses run on liquid cash. The effect on urban consumers, small and large businesses will be prominent as this move will seem to be crippling down in the sort-term. The semi-urban and rural sections will take more time than urban areas to cope up with the change, however the shortage of smaller denominator notes will create more chaos. People with stationery shops, daily wagers, auto-drivers, small businesses that involve services providers like electricians, plumbers, upholsters, handyman, even online e-commerce companies that do not have online payment facilities had to capitulate to the situation. After a point, other denominations which are less than 2000 and 500 notes will get impacted and there would be requirement for smaller currencies in the next few weeks. The incurred loss during these days cannot be mended or attained by them. (pic: BGR) Assuming the attempt to clear out corruption wasn’t a planned process, the brunt that the common people have been facing since that night was not justified either. The chaos alerted common man driven towards a negative thought-process which led them to fear lack of cash in hand, as this would affect them while travelling, purchasing necessities and other emergency requirements. The initial turmoil to any huge change can be adjusted however, when common man being effected for an unexplained period of time makes them anxious and weary about the situation. Infact many government hospitals and medicine stores refrained from accepting 500 and 1000 rupees notes which was not as per the declaration by PM. Most private entities and organisation neither compromised nor came as a help to common citizens during this crisis, as they were afraid of being penalised by the government. (pic: change.org) Standing behind long queues in the bank each day to withdraw nominal amount which is insufficient however, lately the weekly withdrawal was increased to soothe the civilians from unrest for the time being. Although this effect did not hamper the rich as most of their transactions were online, nonetheless the working class faced the brunt and are still going through the same. (pic: local press co.) The controversy of introducing Rs.2000 note coined several doubts on the government as to what could the strategy be? Moreover seemed like an unsolved mystery. Although this demonetising step has the potential to pin down the small rogues, scrape off the illegal transactions in real estate, gold and other sectors where circulation of unaccounted money was vigorous. Mostly the daily wagers, cash related businesses and services were under a huge loss and had succumbed to the currency crunch. There wouldn’t have been shortage of cash in banks and ATMs (the new 2000 and 500 notes) and people who belong to working class would not have been the victims of the crisis if the idea to demonetise would have been more planned. Plus, the primary focus should be on recovering the safeguarded money of people kept in the overseas. (pic: local press co.) (pic: hiimpact) A lot of corruption came into notice which can be called as the demonetising effect. Various unaccounted money in the form of real-estate and gold were discovered from certain section of people. True though that the act could be a start of a new economy for India. The utmost that indian citizens can give away during this crisis is patience as they work hard, pays tax and compromises to anything that could be good for the country. Hoping to see the world of digitalization strike in India and making the people aware of benefits of transacting digitally.

Cluster=16 Demonetization Anniversary: Decoding the Effects of Indian Currency Notes Ban As the clock struck 8 pm on November 8, 2016, India came to a standstill and Prime Minister Narendra Modi announced one of the most ground breaking changes in the Indian economy. The Indian Prime Minister announced his plans of banning Rs 500 and Rs 1000 notes with several motives in mind and thus began India’s struggle with demonetization. A year after the country was wiped out of old currency, the effects of Narendra Modi’s demonetization can still be felt in the economy. Demonetization has been one of the most criticized moves by PM Modi and everyone from former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh to former RBI Governor Raghuram Rajan has condemned this move and its effects on the Indian economy. From slowing down the economic growth in various sectors to giving people nightmares of the long queues and the inability to spend liquid cash freely, the hullabaloo created by demonetization is remembered by one and all on its first anniversary. Demonetization began as a way to curb the black money from our economy was later addressed as a means of making India cashless and giving digital India a boost. Demonetization was initiated with a wide array of motives like stripping the Indian economy of its black money, push people to pay taxes for the unaccounted pile of cash, curb terrorism, promote the digital India movement and make India a cashless economy. Demonetization and Personal Finance Piggybanks have been transformed to savings accounts as people turn towards increasing bank balances instead of stashing emergency cash in different corners of the house. People finally began to trust the digital payment systems; because that was the only option they were left with. Demonetization proved that Indians can strive and adapt to any changes and made people financially aware about the different spending options. The government’s efforts to revamp the currency system provided people with a boost to use the cash that was lying around and invest it in a more productive way. The more native and conservative people also opened up towards the era of plastic cash and made several Indians tech friendly. Demonetization and Black Money One of the most important points that pushed people to support demonetization was its associating with bringing an end to the black money problem in India. However, almost 99% of the money was deposited back to RBI. The statistics revealed that either the hoarders found a way to legitimize their black money or did not hold them in the form of cash. But this was known by many before the RBI reports as well. Black money hoarders do not hold the money in cash according to several finance experts and when this point was highlighted time and again, other important effects of demonetization were publicized by the government, like the role of demonetization on curbing terrorism. Demonetization and Terror Funding The second reason to support demonetization was its role in curbing terrorism by increasing the obstacles in terror funding. Terrorist organization were known to use fake Indian currency notes for funding their projects and the government believed that this could be contained with the help of demonetization. The Income Tax department seized Rs. 474.37 crore in new and old currency from November 9, 2016 to January 4, 2017 (the demonetization period). However, there are no reports if the money seized had any association with terror funding. In spite of these numbers, there is no doubting that the cash reserves of several terror groups were severely hit in the early days of demonetization. Demonetization and Digital India Pushing India towards becoming a cashless economy was another reason that demonetization was publicized for. People turned towards digital transactions for everything from buying groceries from a road side vendor to paying utility bills during the time of demonetization. However, as the flow of cash into the economy began to increase, the use of these apps and digital wallets saw a slide once again. Demonetization and Tax Payments Pushing Indians to deposit and account the cash lying in their house also meant a rise in the tax payments for the country. According to government reports the income tax payers saw a record increase in the post demonetization era. 9.1 million New taxpayers were added to the slab which was an 80% rise over the typical yearly rise. This increase in the number of taxpaying citizens in the country has been credited to demonetization. This increase was also resonated in IT returns filing and advance tax payment. Demonetization and GDP The ban on old notes is being cited as one of the key contributors to the economic slowdown. With the gross domestic product (GDP) for the April-June quarter slipping to 5.7%, the reality of the economic slowdown could not be ignored. The World Bank has reduced the India GDP growth forecast to 7% for 2017-18 owing to demonetization and GST (Goods and Service tax). The slowdown is being cited as a delayed consequence of demonetization by the World Bank and while there are various other reasons at play, the steep decline has been credited to be an effect of demonetization. Demonetization and MSMEs Demonetization had a lasting effect on Indians MSMEs (Medium, Small and Micro Enterprises). Various medium and small enterprises turned towards digitalization, however, the micro industries were affected by the worst of its wrath. The micro industry owners were not a part of the black economy and they were clearly unprepared for the effects of demonetization. Many micro industry workers returned back to villages and the growth rate of these companies went as low as 1%. The MSME sector has been recovering from the drastic changes and its impact on the revenue, but demonetization forced the MSME sector to be friendlier and more accommodating towards the digital arenas and made them more accommodating towards change. While these are some of the effects of demonetization on the national and economic front, demonetization gave individuals several lessons that have changed the way we look at managing finances. Demonetization made sure that we monetize our earnings to get the best returns possible whether it is by turning to monthly investment schemes to save better or by turning our safe cash pile into an easy withdrawal FD (fixed deposit). The government’s revenue will see an increase because of demonetization and its initial effects are already prevalent in the income tax filings post note ban. Demonetization has played a crucial role in bringing digitalization and financial planning into the forefront for many. India has withstood the immediate chaotic impacts of demonetization and it is evident that the returns of the hardships will begin to show in the coming months.

Cluster=17 Three countries in three continents: After Modi’s India, demonetisation is spreading around the world Six weeks ago, when prime minister Narendra Modi announced his government’s decision to demonetise Rs500 and Rs1,000 notes, it wasn’t just Indians who were taken aback. World leaders, economists, and international organisations watched the bold experiment with a mix of wonder and worry. Would it work as a means to crack down on unaccounted cash and counterfeit currency? So far, Modi’s move has left millions scrambling for cash, hitting consumption and thereby threatening GDP growth in India. Nonetheless, it now appears Modi’s decision was just the first of a handful of such year-end demonetisation exercises around the world. Australia On Dec. 14, Australia’s financial services and revenue minister Kelly O’Dwyer said that the country is reviewing a move to ban its $100 notes, the highest denomination available, as well as potentially restricting cash transactions over a certain limit. Australia, much like India, wants to clamp down on the shadow economy. “Removing large denomination notes in Australia would be good for the economy and good for the banks,” UBS analysts said in a note last month. Pakistan On Dec. 19, Pakistan’s senate passed a resolution to phase out its Rs5,000 notes in an attempt to curtail black money. In value terms, Rs5,000 bills account for 30% of the currency in circulation in the country. Pakistan’s government plans to implement this demonetisation over the next three to five years, in contrast to India’s accelerated approach. The senator who put forward the motion, Osman Saifulla Khan, clarified that the government wasn’t in any way following India’s ideology, saying that he was the last person to be impressed by Modi, according to the Dawn newspaper. Much like India, Pakistan is on a mission to fight tax evasion and the stashing of illegal wealth. Venezuela On Dec. 11, Venezuela—whose inflation rate is estimated to touch 475% this year—announced that it has demonetised its most valuable note, the 100-bolivar bill. The Nicolás Maduro-led government gave citizens a 72-hour window before withdrawing the currency, which accounted for 77% of the nation’s cash in circulation. The government said old notes will be replaced, at some point, with new ones in denominations between 500 and 20,000 bolivars. The South American country believes that cross-border mafia has been buying Venezuelan bolivars and selling them for vast profits in Colombia. “We must keep beating the mafias,” Maduro said. However, the government was forced to give citizens an extended deadline for the use of the 100 bolivar bill after a serious shortage of currency led to violent protests and looting. Tough times In the past, countries such as Myanmar and Zimbabwe tried their luck with demonetisation with worrisome results. In India, the move is already drawing criticism, with several economists questioning the government’s execution of the policy and raising concerns about the lack of infrastructure for a cash-free future in an almost entirely cash-dependent nation. “The biggest problems with India’s demonetisation plans are that there is a lack of nation-wide internet coverage and a lack of planning,” said Lourdes Casanova, senior lecturer at Cornell University’s Johnson School of Management. “This is the first time a currency ban is happening in a country on such a large scale. Theoretically it looks good, but there are massive operational challenges that worry me.” Casanova added that there will be a drop of a “percentage point or two” in quarterly GDP growth and that annual growth would come down proportionately. And that may not bode well for Australia, Venezuela, and Pakistan.

Cluster=18 Demonetisation - The long and short of it India has a long-standing relationship with demonetisation. On January 16, 1978, Rs 1,000, Rs 5,000 and Rs 10,000 currency notes were scrapped through an ordinance, impacting 0.6 percent of the total currency in circulation at the time. Before that, India had experienced demonetisation of high-value currency in January, 1946. On both occasions, it impacted only a miniscule segment of the society and economy. (The salary of an entry-level government officer in 1978 was well below Rs 1,000.) Rs 100 was the highest denomination in circulation until October 1987, when Rs 500 notes were re-introduced, followed by the re-introduction of Rs 1,000 notes in November 2000. However, until 2000-01, the share of high value notes (i.e notes with value greater than Rs 500) was only 26.7 percent of the total currency in circulation. So, what is the immediate impact of the current demonetisation on the people and economy? To be precise: Unsettling. One can see long queues before banks and ATM machines. Workers in the unorganised sector, petty shopkeepers and small businesses are finding it difficult to cope. There is a visible tendency to hoard available legal tender in denominations of Rs 100 and below as emergency funds. In the absence of government statistics, if one relies on news reports, there seems to be some dip in immediate consumption expenditure. Given the scale of demonetisation, this was anticipated. The move was expected to create temporary problems as acknowledged by the prime minister himself. However, minor inconveniences apart, what will be the macro-economic impact? Demonetisation will reduce money supply in the economy. A cursory look at the Reserve bank of India’s data on money supply as on 11th of November shows that M3 (i.e., Broad Money) has shrunk by Rs 38,300 crore on a fortnightly basis and currency available with the public has shrunk by Rs 1.75 lakh crore, while demand deposits and time-deposits have increased. Reduction in money supply means falling consumer spending, investment spending and net exports, leaving aside government spending. It is likely to translate into a decline in nominal GDP in the immediate term. RBI has increased the Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR)—the share of total deposits that commercial banks have to hold as reserves either in cash or as deposits with the central bank—to 100 percent on additional deposits. Hence, hopes of a reduction in interest rates have already been diminished with short-term negative impacts on bank profitability. The unorganised sector, which forms a major part of the Indian economy, is likely to take a transitory hit as this sector operates mainly on a cash basis. While there will be an immediate dip in demand and negative short-term impacts on the economy coupled with hardships for citizens, demonetisation, as a policy measure, certainly has large-scale positive effects. This move is likely to improve tax compliance, given that the Goods and Services Tax (GST) is also on its way to become reality. Government would now have increased funds available for capital spending owing to higher tax collection. Moreover, the availability of funds would reduce the need for the government to borrow from the market, thus making available more credit for the private sector. The RBI may also be in a position to give a one-time bonanza to the government on account of untendered currency. The better fiscal position might also allow the government to reduce income tax rates, which would subsequently lead to higher disposable incomes with tax payers. All this would aid the consumption-multiplier effect. As with any policy decision, this move too will have multiple direct as well as indirect effects. The biggest positive certainly seems to be the eradication of some stocked and staked up money, perhaps earned through illegitimate means or tax evasion. The key here is patience. When 86 per cent of a country’s legal tender becomes illegal, it is but expected that finding ‘a new level of equilibrium’ would require time. If the smaller short-term risks, especially those emanating from the demand side are addressed carefully, if we undertake a holistic net cost benefit analysis, the expected results seem to be promising.

Cluster=19 Viewpoint: Why Modi's currency gamble was 'epic failure' India's attempt to flush out undeclared wealth did not work, central bank figures show. The move, known as "demonetisation", was a flagship policy of Prime Minister Narendra Modi. Economic analyst Vivek Kaul looks at what went wrong. The devil, as they say, is in the detail. On page 195 of this year's Reserve Bank of India (RBI) annual report lies the answer to the question many Indians have been asking for close to 10 months. Has demonetisation been a success or a failure? As per the RBI data, it's safe to say that demonetisation has been a failure of epic proportions. On 8 November last year, the Modi government decided to demonetise 500 ($7; £6) rupee and 1,000 rupee notes, which were worth 15.44tn rupees in total. The idea was to target both counterfeit currency and "black money", or unaccounted wealth, the prime minister told the nation. This was backed up by the government press release accompanying the decision. Black money is essentially money that has been earned but on which taxes haven't been paid. Media captionOld 500 and 1,000 rupee notes went out of circulation in a few hours At midnight, just hours after the announcement, the 500 and 1,000 rupee notes were worthless. People holding these notes had to deposit them in their bank accounts. This money could later be withdrawn, though there were restrictions on the amount of money that could be withdrawn immediately. The hope was that black money held in the form of cash wouldn't be deposited into banks, given that people holding it wouldn't want to be identified - in the process, a vast amount of illegal money would be destroyed. But the RBI report tells a different story. It says that illegal notes worth 15.28tn rupees ($242bn) had been deposited in banks up to 30 June. This basically means that almost 99% of the "demonetised" money was deposited into banks. Hence, almost all the black money held in the form of cash also made it back into the banks and wasn't really destroyed, as had been hoped. The conventional explanation for this is that most people who had black money found other people, who did not have black money, to deposit their savings into the banking system for them. As far as detecting counterfeit currency is concerned, nothing much seems to have happened on this front either. Data from the RBI annual report tells us that the total number of fake 500 rupee (old series) and 1,000 rupee notes detected between April 2016 and March 2017 was 573,891. The total number of notes withdrawn stood at 24.02bn. This basically means that as a proportion, the counterfeit notes identified between April 2016 and March 2017 represent close to 0% of the withdrawn notes. In the previous year, the total number of counterfeit 500 and 1,000 rupee notes detected stood at 404,794. And this happened without any demonetisation. Hence, demonetisation has failed in its two major objectives. Illegal cash crackdown failed - bank report Why India wiped out 86% of its cash overnight Currency move was 'bad economics' India's cash crisis explained 'eDesperate housewives' scramble to change secret savings The funny thing is that there were no estimates of how much black money was held in the form of cash. The government admitted as much, after having announced the policy. Finance Minister Arun Jaitley said so in a written reply to a question in the lower house of parliament, the Lok Sabha, on 16 December 2016. Raids carried out by the Income Tax Department suggested that people tended to hold about 5% of their black money in the form of cash. But even this lack of data in the public domain did not stop economists from coming up with their own sets of numbers, trying to defend the decision of the Modi government, and failing to explain what logic they based their assumptions on. India's large cash economy was badly hit by the policy. Even the Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh (the labour wing of the governing Bharatiya Janata Party) admitted: "As many as 250,000 units in the unorganised sector were closed and the real estate sector was badly affected, with a large number of workers losing their jobs." Agriculture, a sector which largely operates on cash, was hard hit too, with farmers not being paid enough for vegetables and pulses they had grown. Many protested and several state governments waived payments on farm loans. Image copyrightAFP Image caption New 2,000 rupee denomination notes were introduced Over and above this, the government's policy caused a huge cash shortage, with people having to spend many days standing in ATM lines trying to withdraw their own money. Some even died in the process. As far as the Modi government is concerned, it is unlikely to admit it was a big mistake and will continue to put a positive spin on it, as it has since last November. Things will not change on that front. To conclude, no relatively healthy economy has ever carried out demonetisation. As the latest Economic Survey of the government of India points out: "India's demonetisation is unprecedented in international economic history, in that it combined secrecy and suddenness amidst normal economic and political conditions. All other sudden demonetisations have occurred in the context of hyperinflation, wars, political upheavals or other extreme circumstances." The real costs of this unprecedented event are only just starting to come out.

Cluster=20 One year of demonetisation: How much note ban has changed India To break the grip of corruption and black money, we have decided that the 500 rupee and 1,000 rupee currency notes presently in use will no longer be legal tender from midnight tonight, that is, 8th November 2016." With these words, Prime Minister Narendra Modi had announced demonetisation a year ago that took everyone by surprise. One year down the line, the jury is still out on the success of the Narendra Modi government's decision to discontinue about 15.4 lakh crore of currencies in denominations of Rs 500 and Rs 1000. The objectives of demonetisation, as defined by government in various phases, were to crack a whip against black money, fight counterfeit currency in circulation, formalisation of cash-dependent businesses, bringing back money lying idle in the banking system and hitting hard at the financial backbone of terrorism and naxalism. HOW MONEY FOUND WAY TO BANKS? According to Union Finance Minister Arun Jaitley's statement in Parliament, Rs 4.9 lakh crore was deposited in about 1.48 lakh bank accounts post-demonetisation. These were high value deposits of over Rs 80 lakh each. The average deposit size was over Rs 3.3 crore for all 1.48 lakh bank accounts. Smaller deposits, ranging Rs 2 lakh to Rs 80 lakh, were made in about 1.09 crore bank accounts after demonetisation was announced. The average deposit size in these accounts was Rs 5 lakh. According to one estimate the total deposits made after demonetisation accounted for more than Rs 10 lakh or simply about two-thirds of the total demonetised money. In August, the Reserve Bank of India declared in its annual report, that of demonetised currencies worth Rs 15.4 lakh crore, the high value notes worth Rs 15.3 lakh crore were deposited in the banks. This means, about 99 per cent of the demonetised currency came back to the banking system by June 30. Several critics raised questions about the success of demonetisation saying that coming back of almost entire invalidated currency stock into the banking system meant, the government could not find any black with the note ban. However, the real import of the figures could be gauged only after the taxmen have done their job by establishing money trail. ACTION AGAINST BLACK MONEY The government has projected demonetisation is a big ongoing success story in fight against black money. Addressing a rally in Himachal Pradesh yesterday, PM Narendra Modi yesterday said, "Rs 4,000 crore fraud found in probe into 5,000 companies out of 3 lakh that have shut down after demonetisation." The Ministry of Corporate Affairs in a release said, "Preliminary enquiry on the basis of information received from 56 banks in respect of 35,000 companies involving 58,000 accounts has revealed that an amount of over Rs 17,000 crore was deposited and withdrawn post demonetisation." In one case, a company which had a negative opening balance on November 8, 2016, deposited and withdrew Rs 2,484 crore post-demonetisation. "Based on the massive drive undertaken by Ministry of Corporate Affairs around 2.24 lakh companies have been struck off till date for remaining inactive for a period of two years or more," the statement read. Earlier, the government said that 1.63 lakh companies were shut down across the country on the basis of data mined after demonetisation. Of these, nearly 38,000 were found to be shell companies - firms in existence not for business but financial deception. Assuming that government's that most black money has been detected after demonetisation, economist Surjit Bhalla estimated that the move would yield Rs 2.5 lakh crore additional revenue in the first year while Rs 1.5 lakh crore additional earning will accrue to the central coffer every year in perpetuity. TACKLING COUNTERFEIT CURRENCY As per the records available in public domain till date, demonetisation does not seem to have been a blow to fake currency business. According to the National Investigation Agency, counterfeit currencies worth only Rs 400 crore were in circulation in 2015. This was found to be about 0.028 per cent of the total currency in circulation. Earlier this year, a report suggested that of all the returned Rs 1000 notes, only 0.0007 per cent was found to be counterfeit. Of the all the returned Rs 500 notes, 0.002 per cent was counterfeit. The total value of the fake currency notes identified by the banks of the returned demonetised currency is Rs 41 crore. The critics argue that either the banks failed to distinguish counterfeit currencies from the genuine ones on mass scale or the counterfeit currency did not exist in the measure expected by the government. DIGITAL PUSH BY DEMONETISATION Among other things, demonetisation brought digital cash payment awareness in the country. According to the Payments Council of India, the growth rate of the digital payments industry accelerated post-demonetisation by 40-70 per cent. It was earlier in the range of 20-50 per cent. The spike in digital transactions was evident soon after demonetisation but it saw decline in the subsequent months with remonetisation eased currency shortage. In November last year, there were 671.49 million digital transactions which increased to 957.50 million in December. But, by July it had come down to 862.38 million digital payments. In terms of value of digital transactions, November 2016 saw digital payments worth Rs 94 lakh crore. They rose to Rs 149 lakh crore in March. The corresponding figure for July was Rs 107 lakh crore. As per records, digital money transfer through Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) and National Electronic Funds Transfer (NEFT) grew by 6 per cent in terms of number and by 20 per cent in value of transactions this year in comparison 2016-17. FISCAL GROWTH AND INSURGENCIES In the first fiscal quarter after demonetisation was announced, the GDP growth rate fell to 6.1 per cent compared to 7.9 for the same period the previous year. The GDP growth rate further slipped to 5.7 for April-June quarter compared to 7.1 for the corresponding period last year. But, it is not clear yet, if the decline in GDP growth rate was due to demonetisation or a continuation of the trend after the last quarter of 2015-16. Further, pre-GST uncertainty is said to have played a major role in production sluggishness in April-June period this fiscal. Expectations are that the GDP figures for June-September would show a revival trend. Another argument for demonetisation was to break the backbone of terrorism and naxalism. However, there is not adequate proof to back the claim. Incidents of terrorism have seen spurt in Kashmir Valley where the casualties on both sides have gone up sharply. Maoist insurgency has shown decline. But, activists working in the affected regions have credited the law enforcing and counter-insurgency agencies for what is perceived as a dull phase in naxal insurgency in eastern states. Demonetisation came as a major disruption that, many economists believed, was necessary for the Indian economy before it could be projected to the next level. Demonetisation further got integrated with the Goods and Services Tax (GST) rollout. The government expects that the twin measures would pay rich dividends in terms of revenue to carry out its social welfare and development programmes while cracking down on black money.

the size of allSentences : 1105
Input set size 1105

 Link Clustering for tables summaries...
cluster 1
    Sentence 1 : The demonetisation also got support from Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh Nara Chandrababu Naidu.
    Sentence 2 : Later, the former Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh Mayawati Prabhu Das stated the situation to "a financial emergency", by saying "It looks as if Bharat has shut down."
cluster 2
    Sentence 1 : A Parliamentary panel report in April 2017 stated that rural households and honest taxpayers were the worst hit by demonetisation.
    Sentence 2 : Various medium and small enterprises turned towards digitalization, however, the micro industries were affected by the worst of its wrath.
cluster 3
    Sentence 1 : But, activists working in the affected regions have credited the law enforcing and counter-insurgency agencies for what is perceived as a dull phase in naxal insurgency in eastern states.
cluster 4
    Sentence 1 : Manufacturing, which is the most important indicator of economic growth and employment has grown at a very slow rate post demonetisation.
    Sentence 2 : Both the Immediate Mobile Payments System (IMPS) and the United Payments Interface (UPI), which support instant payments using mobile phones, have grown substantially since demonetisation, even as cash has returned to the economy.
cluster 5
    Sentence 1 : Rest you preserve for your own benefits.
    Sentence 2 : Please let people know your response on this step.
cluster 6
    Sentence 1 : Also, Indians who are on foreign visits may not be able to come back to India immediately, hence locking their money.
    Sentence 2 : However, whether it is a model to be replicated by other countries struggling to combat corruption and illicit money is not yet clear.
    Sentence 3 : However, there is not adequate proof to back the claim.
    Sentence 4 : So, government will not be able to provide enough money to banks to pass on to consumers.
cluster 7
    Sentence 1 : Maoist insurgency has shown decline.
    Sentence 2 : Ratan Tata has shown his irritation about corruption and bribe many times.
cluster 8
    Sentence 1 : Moreover seemed like an unsolved mystery.
cluster 9
    Sentence 1 : In value terms, Rs5,000 bills account for 30% of the currency in circulation in the country.
    Sentence 2 : These notes accounted for 86 percent of the country’s cash supply by value.
    Sentence 3 : Its effect will be a telling one because nearly 86% of currency value in circulation was withdrawn without replacing bulk of it.
    Sentence 4 : It constituted to nearly 49% of the previous currency supply in terms of value.
    Sentence 5 : The Nicolás Maduro-led government gave citizens a 72-hour window before withdrawing the currency, which accounted for 77% of the nation’s cash in circulation.
    Sentence 6 : India's Demonetization In 2016, the Indian government decided to demonetize the 500- and 1000- rupee notes, the two biggest denominations in its currency system; these notes accounted for 86% of the country’s circulating cash.
cluster 10
    Sentence 1 : The RBI notes that the “detection of counterfeit notes increased across denominations – notably, Rs 500 and Rs 1,000 – during 2016-17”.
    Sentence 2 : A note circulated by SBI chief economist Soumya Kanti Ghosh notes that while increased detection of counterfeit notes is heartening, its still disappointing.
    Sentence 3 : “On a positive note, the detection of counterfeit old 500 and 1000 denomination notes has witnessed an increase of 42% in 2017.
cluster 11
    Sentence 1 : Australia On Dec. 14, Australia’s financial services and revenue minister Kelly O’Dwyer said that the country is reviewing a move to ban its $100 notes, the highest denomination available, as well as potentially restricting cash transactions over a certain limit.
    Sentence 2 : Australia, much like India, wants to clamp down on the shadow economy.
    Sentence 3 : And that may not bode well for Australia, Venezuela, and Pakistan.
cluster 12
    Sentence 1 : The decision met with mixed initial reactions.
    Sentence 2 : The move has also been criticised as poorly planned and unfair, and was met with protests, litigation, and strikes against the government in several places across India.
cluster 13
    Sentence 1 : This might increase the government’s tax revenue.
    Sentence 2 : It will drastically increase the revenue generated from tax.
    Sentence 3 : There's quite obviously substantial tax revenue going uncollected.
cluster 14
    Sentence 1 : Demonetization is not a big disaster like global banking sector crisis of 2007; but at the same time, it will act as a liquidity shock that disturbs economic activities.
    Sentence 2 : Demonetization affects the economy through the liquidity side.
    Sentence 3 : Demonetization technically is a liquidity shock; a sudden stop in terms of currency availability.
cluster 15
    Sentence 1 : When a company decides to invest in a product they can calculate almost every kind of expenditure they will have to face except bribe.
    Sentence 2 : These laborers will have to face hardships for comings days since they live a life on hand to mouth earnings.
cluster 16
    Sentence 1 : Government would now have increased funds available for capital spending owing to higher tax collection.
    Sentence 2 : Moreover, the availability of funds would reduce the need for the government to borrow from the market, thus making available more credit for the private sector.
cluster 17
    Sentence 1 : This forced the farmers across the country to dump their products in desperation.
    Sentence 2 : In the days following the demonetisation, the country faced severe cash shortages with severe detrimental effects across the economy.
    Sentence 3 : The costs imposed by the currency-scrapping exercise were, however, quite severe, at least in the short term, disrupting ordinary life across the country for several weeks.
cluster 18
    Sentence 1 : Fake and counterfeit notes, a reckoning Another much-touted advantage of demonetisation is that would help curb the amount of fake currency in circulation – fake currency that the Modi government believed helped anti-social elements engage in criminal activities.
    Sentence 2 : In the immediate weeks after demonetisation, one school of thought believed that if a sizeable amount of demonetisation notes didn’t return to the RBI (presumably because the owners of the notes feared getting caught for tax evasion, this could translate into a “windfall gain” for the Modi government.
    Sentence 3 : Terrorist organization were known to use fake Indian currency notes for funding their projects and the government believed that this could be contained with the help of demonetization.
cluster 19
    Sentence 1 : "Even if the demonetisation created a slowdown, it is not going to change the long-term momentum of where India is going with its economic growth," said Dean Kishore Mahbubani of the Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy at the National University of Singapore.
    Sentence 2 : There is a lot of momentum in the Indian economy," Mahbubani further said.
    Sentence 3 : This is an underestimate," Dr Singh said.
    Sentence 4 : Singh at last termed the demonetisation move as an "organised loot, legalised plunder of the common people".
    Sentence 5 : Speaking to NDTV, he said: "The stated objective of getting at black money, everybody would say is wonderful.
    Sentence 6 : He was speaking with India Today's Karan Thapar where he said: "It is a gigantic mistake, both in terms of its objective of dealing with corruption as well as the objective of one rapid jump of getting into a cashless economy."
cluster 20
    Sentence 1 : The RBI had to spend 79.65 billion rupees on quickly printing updated replacements for the 500 rupee ($7) and 1,000 rupee notes which were abruptly banned at midnight on November 8 last year, according to the central bank's annual report. show chapters [Image: How to build a cashless society?
    Sentence 2 : On 8 November last year, the Modi government decided to demonetise 500 ($7; £6) rupee and 1,000 rupee notes, which were worth 15.44tn rupees in total.
    Sentence 3 : With little warning, India's Prime Minister Narendra Modi announced to the citizenry on Nov. 8 that those notes were worthless, effective immediately – and they had until the end of the year to deposit or exchange them for newly introduced 2000 rupee and 500 rupee bills.
    Sentence 4 : Similar news was reported in The Hindu Business Line on 21 October 2016, also describing a forthcoming 2000 rupee note and the possible withdrawal of 500 and 1000 rupee notes.
    Sentence 5 : A fortnight before the official announcement, a news report in the Hindi daily Dainik Jagran quoting RBI sources speaking of the planned release of new 2000 rupee notes alongside withdrawal of 500 and 1000 rupee notes.
cluster 21
    Sentence 1 : It is a sharp dip from the number of passengers booked on November 9, when 27,237 passengers had booked tickets in 1A and 69,950 in 2A."
    Sentence 2 : A senior official said, "On November 13, 42.7 million passengers were nationally booked across all classes.
cluster 22
    Sentence 1 : The previous year, the central bank had earned interest of Rs506 crore in its liquidity management operations.
    Sentence 2 : One is just cash and central bank reserves, the other is that multiplied by the velocity of money and the actions of the banking system.
    Sentence 3 : The central bank however does caution that it is still in the process of checking and verifying soiled and questionable bank notes.
cluster 23
    Sentence 1 : 1.54 lakh crore) for the Indian economy.
    Sentence 2 : The government itself believed that roughly Rs 2 -3 lakh crore would not return, according to statements the-then attorney general made before the Supreme Court in November 2016.
    Sentence 3 : Rs 15.28 lakh crore out of the Rs 15.44 lakh crore in currency that was rendered invalid on November 8, 2016 has come back into the Indian banking system.
    Sentence 4 : 30.7 lakh crore, as against the expectation of Rs.
    Sentence 5 : The corresponding figure for July was Rs 107 lakh crore.
    Sentence 6 : According to Union Finance Minister Arun Jaitley's statement in Parliament, Rs 4.9 lakh crore was deposited in about 1.48 lakh bank accounts post-demonetisation.
    Sentence 7 : Assuming that government's that most black money has been detected after demonetisation, economist Surjit Bhalla estimated that the move would yield Rs 2.5 lakh crore additional revenue in the first year while Rs 1.5 lakh crore additional earning will accrue to the central coffer every year in perpetuity.
    Sentence 8 : 74.9 lakh crore.
    Sentence 9 : If Rs 15.28 lakh crore out of Rs 15.44 lakh crore has come back into the system what does this mean for black money?
    Sentence 10 : They rose to Rs 149 lakh crore in March.
    Sentence 11 : The average deposit size in these accounts was Rs 5 lakh.
    Sentence 12 : The average deposit size was over Rs 3.3 crore for all 1.48 lakh bank accounts.
cluster 24
    Sentence 1 : Banerjee also stated "I give the government 3 day ultimatum, fix things or withdraw the demonetisation scheme".
    Sentence 2 : "I find no reasoning behind this decision.
cluster 25
    Sentence 1 : So its easy to understand that what will be the effects on these 63% and 70% patients.
    Sentence 2 : According to National Family Health Survey-3, the private medical sector remains the primary source of health care for 70% of households in urban areas and 63% of households in rural areas.
cluster 26
    Sentence 1 : For economies are complex things with many moving parts.
    Sentence 2 : For Unlu, the initial economic fallout may be too much for other economies to stomach.
cluster 27
    Sentence 1 : A decrease in the money supply is contractionary upon the economy.
    Sentence 2 : Demonetisation will reduce money supply in the economy.
    Sentence 3 : If V is very much lower in the informal economy then even with the loss of some of that base money and the move of the rest into the formal banking system then the broad money supply will expand as a result.
    Sentence 4 : If V is higher in that informal economy than in the formal then the demonetisation move significantly reduces the broad money supply and that's contractionary.
cluster 28
    Sentence 1 : The biggest gainers were mobile wallet companies that offer ease of transactions through a large network of partners.
cluster 29
    Sentence 1 : After demonetization of Rs 1000 and Rs 500, the government introduced new Rs 500 but not Rs 1000.
    Sentence 2 : What will be the positive and negative effects of demonization of ₹500/1000 notes on Indian economy?
    Sentence 3 : Invalidation of Rs 500 and 100o notes will jeopardize this scheme.
    Sentence 4 : RBI on demonetization The government had announced demonetization of Rs 1000 and Rs 500 note on November 8, 2016.
    Sentence 5 : Rs 500 and Rs 1000 shares a major part.
    Sentence 6 : The Indian Prime Minister announced his plans of banning Rs 500 and Rs 1000 notes with several motives in mind and thus began India’s struggle with demonetization.
    Sentence 7 : As a result of the withdrawal of Rs 500 and Rs 1000 notes, there occurred huge gap in the currency composition as after Rs 100; Rs 2000 is the only denomination.
    Sentence 8 : Positive and Negative effects of demonization of ₹500/1000 notes on Indian economy Now this is the mother of all headlines.
    Sentence 9 : Absence of intermediate denominations like Rs 500 and Rs 1000 will reduce the utility of Rs 2000.
cluster 30
    Sentence 1 : BJP spokesperson Meenakshi Lekhi had said in 2014 that members of the public who were often illiterate and had no access to banking facilities would be adversely affected by such a policy.
    Sentence 2 : Most of them had this question in mind as they were unaware of the reason behind such a drastic change.
cluster 31
    Sentence 1 : In September 2017, Google launched its first India-only banking app using BHIM called Google Tez, that can be used by customers of over 50 banks on the UPI platform, and is available in several Indian languages.
    Sentence 2 : In December 2016, the government launched an app called BHIM (Bharat Interface for Money) based on the Unified Payment Interface.
cluster 32
    Sentence 1 : Do you think PM Modi's decision will help end Black Money?
    Sentence 2 : But what do you think was this the first time an Indian currency was banned of a sudden?
cluster 33
    Sentence 1 : Many protested and several state governments waived payments on farm loans.
    Sentence 2 : It has also adversely impacted the primary function of banks to issue loans and has put pressure on them as current account holders demand0 large sums of cash.
cluster 34
    Sentence 1 : Industrialist Rajiv Bajaj criticised the demonetisation, saying that not just the execution, but the concept of demonetisation was wrong in itself.
    Sentence 2 : It said that it was not just the poor that suffered, but the manufacturing sector was impacted too.
cluster 35
    Sentence 1 : App downloads for Paytm increased by 300%.
cluster 36
    Sentence 1 : However, the government was forced to give citizens an extended deadline for the use of the 100 bolivar bill after a serious shortage of currency led to violent protests and looting.
    Sentence 2 : Venezuela On Dec. 11, Venezuela—whose inflation rate is estimated to touch 475% this year—announced that it has demonetised its most valuable note, the 100-bolivar bill.
cluster 37
    Sentence 1 : Pakistan On Dec. 19, Pakistan’s senate passed a resolution to phase out its Rs5,000 notes in an attempt to curtail black money.
    Sentence 2 : Pakistan’s government plans to implement this demonetisation over the next three to five years, in contrast to India’s accelerated approach.
cluster 38
    Sentence 1 : Its impact is felt by every Indian citizen.
    Sentence 2 : Its not bad as it keeps us alert for the possible adverse conditions.
cluster 39
    Sentence 1 : This may lead to increase in gold imports in long run.
    Sentence 2 : This increase was also resonated in IT returns filing and advance tax payment.
    Sentence 3 : This increase in the number of taxpaying citizens in the country has been credited to demonetization.
    Sentence 4 : This was largely due to less availability of cash in cash-intensive industries like manufacturing and construction.
    Sentence 5 : This indicates a slowdown in both, manufacturing and services industries.
cluster 40
    Sentence 1 : As with any policy decision, this move too will have multiple direct as well as indirect effects.
    Sentence 2 : So far its effects have been disastrous for the middle- and lower-middle classes, as well as the poor.
    Sentence 3 : Initially, the move received support from several bankers as well as from some international commentators.
cluster 41
    Sentence 1 : "We are seeing an increased demand for bitcoin and India clearly has shortage of supply, making the demand and lack of liquidity push up prices of bitcoin as compared to global exchanges,” said Coinsecure CEO Mohit Kalra.
    Sentence 2 : “The biggest problems with India’s demonetisation plans are that there is a lack of nation-wide internet coverage and a lack of planning,” said Lourdes Casanova, senior lecturer at Cornell University’s Johnson School of Management.
    Sentence 3 : In India, the move is already drawing criticism, with several economists questioning the government’s execution of the policy and raising concerns about the lack of infrastructure for a cash-free future in an almost entirely cash-dependent nation.
cluster 42
    Sentence 1 : Other alternatives include mobile payments systems linked to e-commerce businesses like Ola Money, FreeCharge, Flipkart Wallet.
    Sentence 2 : People with stationery shops, daily wagers, auto-drivers, small businesses that involve services providers like electricians, plumbers, upholsters, handyman, even online e-commerce companies that do not have online payment facilities had to capitulate to the situation.
cluster 43
    Sentence 1 : Individuals who are sitting on a pile of cash usually do not deposit the amount in the bank or invest anywhere as they would be required to show income or submit PAN for any valid financial transactions.
    Sentence 2 : Individuals are required to submit PAN for any deposit above Rs 50,000 in cash, which will help tax department to track individuals with high denominations.
cluster 44
    Sentence 1 : Usually, black income is kept in the form of physical assets like gold, land, buildings etc. Hence the amount of black money countered by demonetization depend upon the amount of black money held in the form of cash and it will be smaller than expected.
    Sentence 2 : A large portion of this lubricant was immobilized in the form of black money.
    Sentence 3 : Impact on black money: Only a small portion of black money is actually stored in the form of cash.
    Sentence 4 : One, the proportion of black money that was held in the form of cash was quite low.
    Sentence 5 : Hence, almost all the black money held in the form of cash also made it back into the banks and wasn't really destroyed, as had been hoped.
    Sentence 6 : On Black Money: Though only a small portion of black money is stored in the form of cash and majority is in the form of physical assets like gold, land, and building, demonetisation of the rupee 500 and 1000 notes might take out a lot of black money from the economy.
    Sentence 7 : Raids carried out by the Income Tax Department suggested that people tended to hold about 5% of their black money in the form of cash.
    Sentence 8 : Patel also believed that people never store black money in the form of currency for too long.
    Sentence 9 : The hope was that black money held in the form of cash wouldn't be deposited into banks, given that people holding it wouldn't want to be identified - in the process, a vast amount of illegal money would be destroyed.
cluster 45
    Sentence 1 : Yes, I agree that this number includes every living human being (children, senior citizens, women), so you can say that this number will reduce on practical scale.
    Sentence 2 : Other transit routes includes Dubai, Thailand, Malaysia, Sri Lanka and China (source).
cluster 46
    Sentence 1 : Many micro industry workers returned back to villages and the growth rate of these companies went as low as 1%.
    Sentence 2 : On Small Scale Industries:Businesses like the textile industry, salons, restaurants, and seasonal businesses are low capital enterprises and work on the basis of liquidity preference.
cluster 47
    Sentence 1 : Fitch cut GDP growth rate to 6.9 per cent Global rating agency Fitch earlier in January had lowered its GDP growth forecasts for India to 6.9 per cent from 7.4 per cent saying there will be 'temporary disruptions' to economic activity post demonetisation.
    Sentence 2 : The move reduced the country's industrial production and its GDP growth rate.
    Sentence 3 : Now that we know how note ban has brought down India's economic growth rate to 6.1 per cent, it's time to go over and see what the economists had predicted and how accurate they are.
    Sentence 4 : Global analysts cut their forecasts of India's GDP growth rate for the financial year 2016-17 by 0.5 to 3 percent due to demonetisation.
    Sentence 5 : India's GDP in 2016 is estimated to be US$2.25 trillion, hence, each 1 per cent reduction in growth rate represents a shortfall of US$22.5 billion (?
    Sentence 6 : "India's GDP growth rate of around 7 per cent over 2016-17 is commendable; tribute goes to policy initiatives such as the GST and the new bankruptcy law.
    Sentence 7 : PM Modi's demonetisation brings GDP down to 6.1 per cent: Top economists stand vindicated Barely six months after demonetisation, India's Gross Domestic Product or GDP growth rate has slumped down to 6.1 per cent in the January-March period, lowest in more than two years.
cluster 48
    Sentence 1 : As a result, many people with legitimately earned old notes were left stranded with old currency notes.
    Sentence 2 : The result?
    Sentence 3 : As a result, revenue collections of the local civic bodies jumped.
cluster 49
    Sentence 1 : Prime Minister Narendra Modi appealed to Indian population in his radio address in Dec 2016 to go cashless with slogan - Ҍess-cashҠfirst, ңashless societyҠnext.
    Sentence 2 : It doesn't reflect properly on Prime Minister's Office, Finance Minister and the Reserve Bank of India.
    Sentence 3 : Demonetization Anniversary: Decoding the Effects of Indian Currency Notes Ban As the clock struck 8 pm on November 8, 2016, India came to a standstill and Prime Minister Narendra Modi announced one of the most ground breaking changes in the Indian economy.
    Sentence 4 : "The drama of demonetization allowed Prime Minister Narendra Modi to demonstrate in a very visible way his commitment to fighting corruption and black money."
    Sentence 5 : The move, known as "demonetisation", was a flagship policy of Prime Minister Narendra Modi.
    Sentence 6 : With these words, Prime Minister Narendra Modi had announced demonetisation a year ago that took everyone by surprise.
    Sentence 7 : How demonetisation affected the Indian economy, in 10 charts New Delhi: A year ago, Prime Minister Narendra Modi announced the scrapping of high-value banknotes which amounted to 86% of currency in circulation.
    Sentence 8 : It was reported that the Prime Minister's Office (PMO) and the Prime Minister Modi himself were directly coordinating the raids conducted by the Income Tax, Enforcement Directorate (ED) and other agencies.
    Sentence 9 : The Union cabinet was informed about the plan on 8 November 2016 in a meeting called by the Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi.
    Sentence 10 : Prime Minister Narendra Modi's BJP party saw a resounding electoral win in March, following implementation.
cluster 50
    Sentence 1 : Demonetization and Tax Payments Pushing Indians to deposit and account the cash lying in their house also meant a rise in the tax payments for the country.
    Sentence 2 : Thus, giving millions of Indians a panic attack.
    Sentence 3 : Demonetization and MSMEs Demonetization had a lasting effect on Indians MSMEs (Medium, Small and Micro Enterprises).
cluster 51
    Sentence 1 : Emergency Situations: People who need money for some urgent work like to see a doctor, pay hospital charges, medical emergency, travelling etc will be in a highly difficult situation as no one will accept their money (even if they have it) if in denominations of Rs 500 or 1000 notes.
    Sentence 2 : Patience of People: Considering all of the above points (and many more in the line), it will need a superman effort from a common man to keep his patience in balance.
    Sentence 3 : Government have to invest more to fulfill the need and you will eat more as compare to others.
    Sentence 4 : Surely stock will be huge which will help government to fulfill the need without any expense.
cluster 52
    Sentence 1 : Amartya Sen Nobel laureate Amartya Sen said demonetisation was a gigantic mistake.
    Sentence 2 : Nobel laureate Indian economist Amartya Sen, severely criticised the demonetisation move calling it a "despotic action" among other things.
    Sentence 3 : Nobel laureate Paul Krugman said that it is difficult to see gains from demonetisation, while there may be significant costs to it.
cluster 53
    Sentence 1 : Tough times In the past, countries such as Myanmar and Zimbabwe tried their luck with demonetisation with worrisome results.
cluster 54
    Sentence 1 : They would hide it somewhere and use it as and when necessary.
    Sentence 2 : An example of demonetization for trade purposes occurred when the nations of the European Union officially began to use the euro as their everyday currencies in 2002.
cluster 55
    Sentence 1 : What are the impacts of Demonetisation on Indian Economy Demonetization is a generations’ memorable experience and is going to be one of the economic events of our time.
    Sentence 2 : Following are the main impacts.
    Sentence 3 : India has withstood the immediate chaotic impacts of demonetization and it is evident that the returns of the hardships will begin to show in the coming months.
cluster 56
    Sentence 1 : So we now have a measure of how quickly transactional cash changes hands in the legitimate Indian economy.
    Sentence 2 : On Daily Wage Workers: A major portion of the Indian workforce is a part of the informal economy.
cluster 57
    Sentence 1 : Households with liquor problems will provide the husbands to seize control of the hidden cash.
    Sentence 2 : Impact on Households: It is an Indian thing in villages and small towns for housewives to keep their saved cash hidden away from their husbands and other family members.
    Sentence 3 : Households lacked liquidity and could not do transactions for daily items.
cluster 58
    Sentence 1 : We're taking some portion of base money out of the system--whatever portion of black money simply vanishes as a result of demonetisation.
    Sentence 2 : And we're reducing the budget deficit as some of that black money gets taxed, which will reduce inflation--again beneficial.
cluster 59
    Sentence 1 : Though, for now, people are more in favor of respected PM because right now they are not suffers.
    Sentence 2 : Any outburst in the tolerance of people will make the situation more terrible.
cluster 60
    Sentence 1 : Prepaid cash cards were another option that customers found useful, and that meant good news for companies like ItzCash.
    Sentence 2 : People finally began to trust the digital payment systems; because that was the only option they were left with.
cluster 61
    Sentence 1 : The department also referred a total of 477 cases to other agencies like the CBI and the Enforcement Directorate (ED) to probe other financial crimes like money laundering, disproportionate assets and corruption.
    Sentence 2 : Several bankers like Arundhati Bhattacharya (Chairperson of State Bank of India) and Chanda Kochhar (MD & CEO of ICICI Bank) appreciated the move in the sense that it would help curb black money.
    Sentence 3 : Businessmen Anand Mahindra (Mahindra Group), Sajjan Jindal (JSW Group), Kunal Bahl (Snapdeal and FreeCharge) also supported the move adding that it would also accelerate e-commerce.
    Sentence 4 : The move also reportedly crippled Communist guerrilla groups (Naxalites) financing through money laundering.
cluster 62
    Sentence 1 : This will encourage electronic transactions in future, thereby increasing the number of formal transaction increasing government revenue by way of taxes and curb fraudulent financial transactions.
    Sentence 2 : To avoid increasing the fiscal deficit, the government would have to reduce spending on social schemes, or increase revenue through taxes or other means.
cluster 63
    Sentence 1 : He later denied the comments.
cluster 64
    Sentence 1 : All this might result in a digital economy where transactions are being recorded and the economy has more white money.
    Sentence 2 : All this is evident from the data provided by the RBI.
    Sentence 3 : All this would aid the consumption-multiplier effect.
cluster 65
    Sentence 1 : “The upsurge in expenditure during the year was on account of change in the production plan of printing presses due to the introduction of new design notes in higher denominations as well as the requirement of larger volume of notes for replacement of the demonetised currency,” the report states.
    Sentence 2 : Cost of printing The central bank also states that the total expenditure incurred on printing bank notes for the year July 2016- June 2017 was Rs 79.65 billion as opposed to Rs 34.2 billion during 2015-16.
    Sentence 3 : “Subject to future corrections, based on the verification process when completed, the estimated value of SBNs [specified bank notes] received as on June 30, 2017, is ₹15.28 trillion,” the RBI said in a report released on Wednesday.
    Sentence 4 : “Subject to future corrections based on verification process when completed, the estimated value of SBNs received on June 30, 2017 is Rs 15.28 lakh crore,” the central bank states.
cluster 66
    Sentence 1 : While these are some of the effects of demonetization on the national and economic front, demonetization gave individuals several lessons that have changed the way we look at managing finances.
    Sentence 2 : In spite of these numbers, there is no doubting that the cash reserves of several terror groups were severely hit in the early days of demonetization.
cluster 67
    Sentence 1 : The demonetisation also came in for sharp criticism from media outside India, with the New York Times saying that the demonetisation was "atrociously planned" and that it did not appear to have combatted black money, while an article in The Guardian stated that "Modi has brought havoc to India".
    Sentence 2 : And the worst may be yet to come," Basu wrote in The New York Times.
cluster 68
    Sentence 1 : And this happened without any demonetisation.
cluster 69
    Sentence 1 : They will face an uphill challenge to get the money converted into currency notes of valid denominations.
    Sentence 2 : They may even face harassment at the hands of Bank officials to get the money exchanged.
    Sentence 3 : They may even have to pay bribes.
    Sentence 4 : They saved this money into banks just to convert the old notes into new notes.
cluster 70
    Sentence 1 : The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) had previously expressed opposition to demonetisation.
    Sentence 2 : His Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) won overwhelming support in March elections in Uttar Pradesh, India most populous and one of its poorest states.
    Sentence 3 : Even the Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh (the labour wing of the governing Bharatiya Janata Party) admitted: "As many as 250,000 units in the unorganised sector were closed and the real estate sector was badly affected, with a large number of workers losing their jobs."
cluster 71
    Sentence 1 : This season requires a lot of cash in hand for purchasing seeds, pesticides, fertilizers, hiring labourers etc. All these activities will be severely hampered due to want of required cash.
    Sentence 2 : Due to scarcity of the new banknotes, many farmers have insufficient cash to purchase seeds, fertilisers and pesticides needed for the plantation of rabi crops usually sown around mid-November.
cluster 72
    Sentence 1 : In one case, two destitute orphans found ?
    Sentence 2 : In one case, a company which had a negative opening balance on November 8, 2016, deposited and withdrew Rs 2,484 crore post-demonetisation.
cluster 73
    Sentence 1 : Hence, demonetisation has failed in its two major objectives.
    Sentence 2 : The surrender rate has reached its highest since demonetisation was announced.
    Sentence 3 : The latest round of demonetisation has undoubtedly affected the common public and bankers.
    Sentence 4 : According to Chhattisgarh Police demonetisation has affected the Naxalite activities.
cluster 74
    Sentence 1 : Money laundering using backdated accounting was carried out by co-operative banks, jewellers, sellers of iPhones, and several other businesses.
    Sentence 2 : This was in addition to other measures proposed to ensure that the exchange transactions are carried out only once by each person.
cluster 75
    Sentence 1 : They are not going to put the black money under the mattress."
    Sentence 2 : They are not connected to banks or any formal channel of banking.
    Sentence 3 : Cheques and ATM swipes are not available everywhere.
cluster 76
    Sentence 1 : Indian Currency Demonetization: Advantages and Disadvantages The government of India recently took a bold step to demonetize Rs 500 and Rs 1000 currency, which means that the legal tender of currency units is declared invalid from the specified date.
    Sentence 2 : BREAKING DOWN 'Demonetization' There are multiple reasons why nations demonetize their local units of currency: to combat inflation to combat corruption and crime (counterfeiting, tax evasion) to discourage a cash-dependent economy to facilitate trade Dramatic Examples of Demonetization The Coinage Act of 1873 demonetized silver as the legal tender of the United States, in favor of fully adopting the gold standard.
    Sentence 3 : In response to the dire situation and pressure from farmers and silver miners and refiners, the Bland-Allison Act remonetized silver as legal tender in 1878.
cluster 77
    Sentence 1 : Of these, only 1,209 were 1A and 16,999 for 2A.
    Sentence 2 : Of these, nearly 38,000 were found to be shell companies - firms in existence not for business but financial deception.
cluster 78
    Sentence 1 : According to the panel, demonetisation created significant disruption throughout economy, because it was carried out without prior study or research.
    Sentence 2 : The sudden nature of the announcement and the prolonged cash shortages in the weeks that followed created significant disruption throughout the economy, threatening economic output.
cluster 79
    Sentence 1 : In response, the government announced that it would start marking customers with indelible ink.
    Sentence 2 : In 1946, the pre-independence government hoped demonetisation would penalise Indian businesses that were concealing the fortunes amassed supplying the Allies in World War II.
cluster 80
    Sentence 1 : As far as detecting counterfeit currency is concerned, nothing much seems to have happened on this front either.
    Sentence 2 : As far as the Modi government is concerned, it is unlikely to admit it was a big mistake and will continue to put a positive spin on it, as it has since last November.
cluster 81
    Sentence 1 : Indian social activist Anna Hazare hailed demonetisation as a revolutionary step.
cluster 82
    Sentence 1 : Most of the people hailed the Modi's strong decision, while poor were shocked by the move.
    Sentence 2 : Positives of this bold and unprecedented move are aplenty but let me try to play the Devil’s Advocate just to see the flip-side of the story (and also to answer the question): Inconvenience to Poor people: Most of the rural and urban poor in India are un-banked i.e. they don’t have bank accounts.
cluster 83
    Sentence 1 : However, the real impact could be much more as 'India's statistical machinery does not capture data on the informal economy on a regular basis'.
    Sentence 2 : Opponents hit out at Modi and accused him of damaging the economy and tarnishing the country's credibility at home and abroad.
    Sentence 3 : As a result of demonetization, and in tandem with Modi's 'Digital India' strategy, which aims to expand India's online infrastructure, the country now sits on a treasure trove of data.
    Sentence 4 : That's stimulatory.
    Sentence 5 : That's perhaps the case for the prosecution.
    Sentence 6 : Prior to the data release, it was unclear how successful Modi's policy had been, and as such his political motives were enough to win him favor with India's vast segment of poorer voters at the polls.
cluster 84
    Sentence 1 : The central bank also said it was in discussion with the government whether to accept the demonetised notes held by citizens and financial institutions in Nepal.
    Sentence 2 : People holding these notes had to deposit them in their bank accounts.
    Sentence 3 : People seeking to exchange their bank notes had to stand in lengthy queues, and several deaths were linked to the rush to exchange cash.
    Sentence 4 : The Indian government had demonetised bank notes on two prior occasionsدnce in 1946 and then in 1978ءnd in both cases, the goal was to combat tax evasion by "black money" held outside the formal economic system.
cluster 85
    Sentence 1 : The intensity of demonetization effects clearly depends upon the duration of the liquidity shocks.
    Sentence 2 : The micro industry owners were not a part of the black economy and they were clearly unprepared for the effects of demonetization.
cluster 86
    Sentence 1 : Click here for enlarge Uncertain benefits The one big promise of demonetisation was a rapid expansion in the tax base but the actual results have been quite modest.
    Sentence 2 : Click here for enlarge Economic costs The rural and informal economy suffered disproportionately because most transactions are cash-based.
cluster 87
    Sentence 1 : Demonetization has been one of the most criticized moves by PM Modi and everyone from former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh to former RBI Governor Raghuram Rajan has condemned this move and its effects on the Indian economy.
    Sentence 2 : On 24 November 2016, in the demonetisation debate, the former prime minister of India Manmohan Singh said "this scheme will hurt small industries, the farming sector.
    Sentence 3 : Dr Manmohan Singh predicted 2 per cent fall Former Prime Minister Dr Manmohan Singh slammed the demonetisation move and called it a 'monumental mismanagement' that might bring GDP down by 2 per cent. "In my opinion that the way the scheme has been implemented will hurt agricultural growth in our country, will hurt small industry, will hurt all those people who are in the informal sector of the economy.
cluster 88
    Sentence 1 : The Ministry of Corporate Affairs in a release said, "Preliminary enquiry on the basis of information received from 56 banks in respect of 35,000 companies involving 58,000 accounts has revealed that an amount of over Rs 17,000 crore was deposited and withdrawn post demonetisation."
    Sentence 2 : "Based on the massive drive undertaken by Ministry of Corporate Affairs around 2.24 lakh companies have been struck off till date for remaining inactive for a period of two years or more," the statement read.
cluster 89
    Sentence 1 : Worst effects will be on startups and medium sized companies and firms.
    Sentence 2 : Cash stringency will compel firms to reduce labour cost and thus reduces income to the poor working class.
cluster 90
    Sentence 1 : How far such gains materialize remains to be seen.
    Sentence 2 : However, it remains to be seen whether this will translate into solid tax evasion cases or convictions.
cluster 91
    Sentence 1 : The rules were also changed for farmers who are permitted to withdraw ?25,000 per week from their accounts against crop loans.
    Sentence 2 : This limit was increased to ?4,500 per day from 1 January, and again to ?10,000 from 16 January 2017.
    Sentence 3 : Cash withdrawals from bank accounts were restricted to ?10,000 per day and ?20,000 per week per account from 10 to 13 November.
    Sentence 4 : This limit was increased to ?24,000 per week from 14 November 2016.
    Sentence 5 : The limit for such exchange was ?4,000 per person from 8 to 13 November, was increased to ?4,500 per person from 14 to 17 November, reduced to ?2,000 per person from 18 November.
    Sentence 6 : A daily limit on withdrawals from ATMs was also imposed varying from ?2,000 per day till 14 November, and ?2,500 per day till 31 December.
cluster 92
    Sentence 1 : It occurs whenever there is a change of national currency: The current form or forms of money is pulled from circulation and retired, often to be replaced with new notes or coins.
    Sentence 2 : The cost of currency printing is a burden on the tax payers and is one of the many disadvantages of de-monetization.
    Sentence 3 : The government has to bear the cost of printing of new currency and its circulation.
    Sentence 4 : Demonetization of currency means discontinuity of the said currency from circulation and replacing it with a new currency.
    Sentence 5 : Sometimes, a country completely replaces the old currency with new currency.
    Sentence 6 : The situation can turn chaotic if there is a delay in the circulation of new currency.
    Sentence 7 : The government is taking all the necessary steps and actions to meet the currency demand and ensure the smooth flow of new currency.
    Sentence 8 : So, now there is whole lot of new currency that is in circulation.
cluster 93
    Sentence 1 : What about people who have to come again due to closing time or any other reason?
    Sentence 2 : But wait, what about people who will come along?
    Sentence 3 : What about people who will come repeatedly, or I can say, daily?
cluster 94
    Sentence 1 : The chaos alerted common man driven towards a negative thought-process which led them to fear lack of cash in hand, as this would affect them while travelling, purchasing necessities and other emergency requirements.
    Sentence 2 : Demonetization and Personal Finance Piggybanks have been transformed to savings accounts as people turn towards increasing bank balances instead of stashing emergency cash in different corners of the house.
cluster 95
    Sentence 1 : 500, 1000 Notes.
    Sentence 2 : Hence, The High Denomination Bank Notes (Demonestisation) Act was implemented.
cluster 96
    Sentence 1 : 474.37 crore in new and old currency from November 9, 2016 to January 4, 2017 (the demonetization period).
    Sentence 2 : On 10 November the police arrested a petrol pump owner at Ranchi when he reportedly tried to deposit ?2.5 billion, belonging to a person affiliated with the banned Communist Party of India (Maoist).
    Sentence 3 : Under the revised guidelines issued on 17 November 2016, families were allowed to withdraw ?250,000 (?2.5 lakh) for wedding expenses from one account provided it was KYC compliant.
    Sentence 4 : In Gujarat, Delhi and many other major cities, sales of gold increased on 9 November, with an increased 20 to 30% premium surging the price as much as ?45,000 (US$700) from the ruling price of ?31,900 (US$500) per 10 grams (0.35 oz).
    Sentence 5 : In a period of four months from 9 November 2016 to 28 February 2017, CBDT claims to have detected an undisclosed income of over ?93.34 billion (US$1.5 billion) through more than 2,362 search, seizure and survey actions by Income Tax department.
cluster 97
    Sentence 1 : To be precise: Unsettling.
    Sentence 2 : To conclude, no relatively healthy economy has ever carried out demonetisation.
cluster 98
    Sentence 1 : Now all these funding will be equal to ZERO.
    Sentence 2 : A year later, progress on all these counts appears to be very modest, and should make us question whether this exercise was needed at all to fulfil its stated aims.
    Sentence 3 : Now all this FICN is equal to ZERO.
cluster 99
    Sentence 1 : Nitin Gadkari, the Minister of Transport, subsequently announced a suspension of toll collections on all national highways across India until midnight of 11 November, later extended until 14 November and again until midnight of 18 November, and yet again till 2 December.
    Sentence 2 : After the demonetisation was announced, about 800,000 truck drivers were affected with scarcity of cash, with around 400,000 trucks stranded at major highways across India were reported.
cluster 100
    Sentence 1 : Here are some advantages and disadvantages of de-monetization: [Image: Black Money tracking] Black Money tracking This move will help the government to track unaccounted black money or cash on which income tax has not been paid.
    Sentence 2 : [Image: Cost of currency destruction] Cost of currency destruction After the news, we have seen that many individuals have burnt their cash and discarded the same, which is a loss to the economy.
    Sentence 3 : [Image: Disadvantages of Currency Demonetization ] Disadvantages of Currency Demonetization It may cause inconvenience for initial few days for those who have to start running to the banks to exchange notes, deposit amount or withdraw the same.
    Sentence 4 : [Image: Conclusion ] Conclusion There are only advantages of demonetization in the long term.
    Sentence 5 : [Image: Jan Dhan Yojana] Jan Dhan Yojana Now individuals are depositing enough cash in their Jan Dhan accounts which they were reluctant to do so a few days back.
cluster 101
    Sentence 1 : But experts believed any slowdown would only be short-lived once the systems adjusted to the new normal, especially if the government heeded calls to lower interest rates by groups like the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI).
    Sentence 2 : Terrorist funding will be deeply pruned so will be the issue of FICN (Fake Indian Currency Note).
    Sentence 3 : On Terror Funding: Demonetisation was aimed as a clean-up of the economy where Fake Indian Currency Notes (FICN) would be checked.
cluster 102
    Sentence 1 : But it's not a certainty.
    Sentence 2 : Viewpoint: Why Modi's currency gamble was 'epic failure' India's attempt to flush out undeclared wealth did not work, central bank figures show.
    Sentence 3 : It's worth reading that analysis in full as it is very thought provoking.
    Sentence 4 : Illegal cash crackdown failed - bank report Why India wiped out 86% of its cash overnight Currency move was 'bad economics' India's cash crisis explained 'eDesperate housewives' scramble to change secret savings The funny thing is that there were no estimates of how much black money was held in the form of cash.
    Sentence 5 : It's a possibility, certainly.
cluster 103
    Sentence 1 : The payment can only be through cheque/electronic payment.
    Sentence 2 : Now the contractors can delay the wage payment for few days till things settle down.
    Sentence 3 : DIGITAL PUSH BY DEMONETISATION Among other things, demonetisation brought digital cash payment awareness in the country.
cluster 104
    Sentence 1 : However, almost 99% of the money was deposited back to RBI.
    Sentence 2 : A Central Bank report released in August 2017 stated that a total 99% of the ?
    Sentence 3 : This basically means that almost 99% of the "demonetised" money was deposited into banks.
    Sentence 4 : With 99% of demonetised notes coming back, this no longer seems likely.
    Sentence 5 : What does 99% of currency coming back mean?
    Sentence 6 : By the end of August 2017, 99% of the banned currency had been deposited in banks: only approximately ?14,000 crore of the total demonetised currency had been discarded, leading analysts to state that the effort had failed to remove black money from the economy.
cluster 105
    Sentence 1 : Standing in long queues and returning with nothing will not please anyone.
    Sentence 2 : As of 18 December 2016, there were still long queues at banks and ATMs.
    Sentence 3 : While major highway toll junctions on the Gujarat and Delhi-Mumbai highways also saw long queues as toll plaza operators refused the old banknotes.
    Sentence 4 : One can see long queues before banks and ATM machines.
cluster 106
    Sentence 1 : Black money is a major factor in India which inhibits the rapid growth in private sector.
    Sentence 2 : Black money holders baldly busted.
    Sentence 3 : New Hope: Black money was a key agenda for BJP during election campaigns.
cluster 107
    Sentence 1 : Although the Constitution has many loopholes, which in turn could backfire this attempt, as we have other ruling parties that may unite to stand against the good cause as it involves the government.
    Sentence 2 : (Precisely this the reason the Jan Dhan Scheme to open Bank accounts was launched, now we can see the other purpose of the scheme).
cluster 108
    Sentence 1 : As per the RBI data, it's safe to say that demonetisation has been a failure of epic proportions.
    Sentence 2 : The results suggest a damning failure for Modi and his flagship policy.
    Sentence 3 : Has demonetisation been a success or a failure?
cluster 109
    Sentence 1 : It was noted in the media that while people were dying in queues to obtain a few thousand rupees in cash, persons with the right connections were able to amass crores of rupees in new notes, thus rendering the demonetisation exercise futile.
    Sentence 2 : It is aimed at rendering all fake notes of rupees 500 and 1000 useless and thus drastically affecting illegal funding of terror groups in Jammu and Kashmir, states in the North-East, and Naxalism-influenced states.
cluster 110
    Sentence 1 : Black money is usually used to fund the illegal activity, terrorism, and money laundering.
    Sentence 2 : The government claimed that the action would curtail the shadow economy and crack down on the use of illicit and counterfeit cash to fund illegal activity and terrorism.
cluster 111
    Sentence 1 : The virtual currency was trading at INR 55,735 in India in November (about $836), compared INR 47,725 (about $712) (Coindesk) elsewhere.
    Sentence 2 : The Average Population per Bank Branch (APBB) as on 31.3.2013 stands at 12,100 (source).
cluster 112
    Sentence 1 : Although this effect did not hamper the rich as most of their transactions were online, nonetheless the working class faced the brunt and are still going through the same.
    Sentence 2 : Since not many people had access to such notes at the time, this did not have a big impact on the country.
    Sentence 3 : The ban really did not have much impact, as the currency of such higher denomination was not accessible to the common people.
cluster 113
    Sentence 1 : “We must keep beating the mafias,” Maduro said.
    Sentence 2 : “Removing large denomination notes in Australia would be good for the economy and good for the banks,” UBS analysts said in a note last month.
    Sentence 3 : The full effect on tax collections “will materialize gradually” as reported income of new taxpayers grows, said the survey.
    Sentence 4 : Theoretically it looks good, but there are massive operational challenges that worry me.” Casanova added that there will be a drop of a “percentage point or two” in quarterly GDP growth and that annual growth would come down proportionately.
cluster 114
    Sentence 1 : It increases the real value of money and allows one to buy more goods with the same amount of money over time.
    Sentence 2 : This will give some time to people to understand the need of digital money in the current era.
    Sentence 3 : The RBI may also be in a position to give a one-time bonanza to the government on account of untendered currency.
cluster 115
    Sentence 1 : Plus, the primary focus should be on recovering the safeguarded money of people kept in the overseas.
    Sentence 2 : The plan to demonetise the ?500 and ?1000 banknotes was initiated between six and ten months before it was announced, and was kept confidential, with only ten people being completely aware of it.
    Sentence 3 : Both the affairs were kept confidential.
cluster 116
    Sentence 1 : Reduction in money supply means falling consumer spending, investment spending and net exports, leaving aside government spending.
cluster 117
    Sentence 1 : Not only politicians but top-notched economists were also divided over the real effect of the demonetisation.
    Sentence 2 : However, the real import of the figures could be gauged only after the taxmen have done their job by establishing money trail.
    Sentence 3 : However, only the top members of the government, security agencies and the central bank were aware of the move.
cluster 118
    Sentence 1 : Economic analyst Vivek Kaul stated in a BBC article that "demonetisation had been a failure of epic proportions."
    Sentence 2 : Economic analyst Vivek Kaul looks at what went wrong.
cluster 119
    Sentence 1 : It is even possible that there is no bank or post office nearby.
    Sentence 2 : Instead it is broad money (also known as M3) where you also include bank deposits, post office savings and other bits and pieces of financial savings.
cluster 120
    Sentence 1 : Demonetization In India: A Boon Or A Bane For The Common Man It came as a surprise to everybody after our PM Narendra Modi declared on trashing the 500 and 1000 rupees notes.
    Sentence 2 : Now, it is not possible to hide the money as the notes have been declared invalid.
    Sentence 3 : Narendra Modi government, in what many are calling a “ Surgical Strike on Black Money”, has made the Rupees 500 and 1000 currency notes (currently in circulation) as invalid or null after midnight of 8th November.
    Sentence 4 : Now when PM Modi has declared the demonetization of Rs 500 and Rs 1000 notes, a positive vibe has been spread through out the country.
cluster 121
    Sentence 1 : It creates a situation where lack of currencies jams consumption, investment, production, employment etc. In this context, the exercise may produce following short term/long term/, consumption/investment, welfare/growth impacts on Indian economy.
    Sentence 2 : Demonetization as a cleaning exercise may produce several good things in the economy.
cluster 122
    Sentence 1 : Initially, the move to demonetise and try to hinder black money was appreciated, but the manner in which it was carried out by causing hardships to common people was criticised.
    Sentence 2 : He criticised the simple way in which black money was assumed as "a hoard of cash", saying that it would have little effect in eliminating "black activities" while "causing much hardship to common people."
    Sentence 3 : According to a survey, the situation was as bad as 83% of people being unable to withdraw money in Hyderabad, while in Pune, the figure was 69%.
cluster 123
    Sentence 1 : Well, the answer is NO. A look into the past will make you realise that India is no new to demonetisation.
    Sentence 2 : India is changing.
cluster 124
    Sentence 1 : All these indicate that currency crunch will be in our economy for the next four months.
    Sentence 2 : Demonetisation came as a major disruption that, many economists believed, was necessary for the Indian economy before it could be projected to the next level.
    Sentence 3 : The disruption to the economy will be such that there will be, possibly, not just no growth in this last quarter of the year but actually a shrinking of the economy.
    Sentence 4 : Downfall in Economy: Though, it will be a very temporary effect, but for the next few months, there will be a visible effect on economy due to the decreased purchased capacity of consumers.
cluster 125
    Sentence 1 : Black money is essentially money that has been earned but on which taxes haven't been paid.
    Sentence 2 : But there's yet one more thing we need to consider and that's the effect upon the money supply.
    Sentence 3 : I've already pointed out that the inflow of money into bank accounts will reduce interest rates and that has a stimulatory effect upon economic growth.
    Sentence 4 : But I don't think this is the strike, which has been well thought through.
cluster 126
    Sentence 1 : The government emphasized the need to furnish PAN (Indian Permanent Account Number) card details on purchases for accountability purposes, and many jewelry shops that were flouting the norms came under crackdowns.
cluster 127
    Sentence 1 : “In value terms, the share of 500 and above banknotes, which had together accounted for 86.4% of the total value of banknotes in circulation at end-March 2016, stood at 73.4% at end-March 2017.
    Sentence 2 : This means that 98.96% of Rs 1,000 and Rs 500 notes that were banned as a result of demonetisation were returned to the central bank by the end of June 2017.
    Sentence 3 : Separately, the data showed that the share of the newly introduced ₹2,000 banknotes in the total value of currency in circulation was 50.2% at end-March 2017.
    Sentence 4 : This basically means that as a proportion, the counterfeit notes identified between April 2016 and March 2017 represent close to 0% of the withdrawn notes.
    Sentence 5 : In volume terms, 10 and 100 banknotes constituted 62.0% of total banknotes in circulation at end-March 2017 as compared with 53.0% at end-March 2016,” the annual report notes.
    Sentence 6 : “The value of banknotes in circulation declined by 20.2% over the year to Rs 13,102 billion as at end-March 2017.
    Sentence 7 : The share of newly introduced 2000 banknotes in the total value of banknotes in circulation was 50.2% at end-March 2017.
cluster 128
    Sentence 1 : The Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation reported collecting about ?1.6 billion (US$25 million) in cash payments of outstanding and advance taxes, within 4 days.
    Sentence 2 : As the use of the demonetised notes had been allowed by the government for the payment of municipal and local body taxes, it led to people using the demonetised ?500 and ?1,000 notes to pay large amounts of outstanding and advance taxes.
cluster 129
    Sentence 1 : The move was expected to create temporary problems as acknowledged by the prime minister himself.
    Sentence 2 : The idea was to target both counterfeit currency and "black money", or unaccounted wealth, the prime minister told the nation.
cluster 130
    Sentence 1 : After a point, other denominations which are less than 2000 and 500 notes will get impacted and there would be requirement for smaller currencies in the next few weeks.
    Sentence 2 : The government said old notes will be replaced, at some point, with new ones in denominations between 500 and 20,000 bolivars.
    Sentence 3 : Coming back to 2016, there is also a buzz that smaller denomination currency notes like Rs 50 and Rs 100 will also be replaced by incorporating new features and design.
    Sentence 4 : There is a regulatory system which guides RBI and Indian government how much new currency notes should be printed other country has to face some serious issues like, inflation.
    Sentence 5 : There are also plans to include new currency in other smaller denominations, especially Rs 100.
cluster 131
    Sentence 1 : Demonetization and GDP The ban on old notes is being cited as one of the key contributors to the economic slowdown.
    Sentence 2 : From slowing down the economic growth in various sectors to giving people nightmares of the long queues and the inability to spend liquid cash freely, the hullabaloo created by demonetization is remembered by one and all on its first anniversary.
    Sentence 3 : The slowdown is being cited as a delayed consequence of demonetization by the World Bank and while there are various other reasons at play, the steep decline has been credited to be an effect of demonetization.
cluster 132
    Sentence 1 : The ATMs and banks closed for two days, hence they will have no other resort (except of net-banking).
    Sentence 2 : They will have to spare a day’s work to go for re-encashment, hence loss of work.
    Sentence 3 : The new rupee notes have different specifications, including size and thickness, requiring re-calibration of ATMs: only 60% of the country’s 200,000 ATMs were operational.
cluster 133
    Sentence 1 : Modi had stated that due to demonetisation, corrupt officials, businessmen and criminals נpopularly believed to hoard large amounts of illicit cash נwould be stuck with "worthless pieces of paper".
    Sentence 2 : By the end of the year, opposition leaders claimed that over 100 people had died due to demonetisation.
cluster 134
    Sentence 1 : Lubrication in Circulation: Money is the lubrication that makes the market economy possible.
    Sentence 2 : Running out of Money: Though, everyone needs new currency notes, it is very hard to provide cash on time, even by RBI.
    Sentence 3 : Hard Money to Digital Money: Though, it is the first of its kind, but we may have to face these surgical strikes on black money in the future too.
cluster 135
    Sentence 1 : Farmers and their unions conducted protest rallies in Gujarat, Amritsar and Muzaffarnagar against the demonetisation as well as against restrictions imposed by the Reserve Bank of India on district cooperative central banks which were ordered not to accept or exchange the demonetised banknotes.
    Sentence 2 : Several people were reported to have died from standing in queues for hours to exchange their old banknotes.
    Sentence 3 : There have been reports of people circumventing the restrictions imposed on exchange transactions by conducting multiple transactions at different bank branches and also sending hired people, employees and followers in groups to exchange large amounts of banned currency at banks.
    Sentence 4 : The public had to queue up outside banks to exchange their old currency for new ones.
cluster 136
    Sentence 1 : Overall economic activies will be dampened in the short term.
    Sentence 2 : Impact on bank deposits and interest rate: Deposit in the short term may rise, but in the long term, its effect will come down.
    Sentence 3 : The term demonetisation is not new to the Indian economy.
    Sentence 4 : "The demonetisation-driven cash crunch that is playing out in India will paralyse economic activity in the short term.
    Sentence 5 : They may reduce interest rate in the short/medium term.
    Sentence 6 : This means that new savings with banks is only transitory or short-term deposit.
cluster 137
    Sentence 1 : Several coins, including two-cent piece, three-cent piece, and half dime were discontinued.
cluster 138
    Sentence 1 : Even if our money is purely white, we go to bank, withdraw some money and go for shopping.
    Sentence 2 : Demonetization made sure that we monetize our earnings to get the best returns possible whether it is by turning to monthly investment schemes to save better or by turning our safe cash pile into an easy withdrawal FD (fixed deposit).
    Sentence 3 : Like, if someone in family is hospitalized or, have marriage in house, we do withdraw our cash and feel comfortable.
cluster 139
    Sentence 1 : RBI’s domestic earnings declined as it had to pay interest of Rs17,426 crore after it mopped up excess liquidity in the banking system following demonetisation.
    Sentence 2 : According to the finance ministry’s estimates published in the latest Economic Survey, the tax base expansion attributable to demonetisation was Rs10,600 crore, lower than what RBI spent on interest expenses, and equivalent to only 0.1% of India’s gross domestic product (GDP).
cluster 140
    Sentence 1 : Towards a Digital Economy: Absence of liquid cash has led to people making transactions using cheques or account transfers.
    Sentence 2 : Indian Economy: Most of the business in India has cash transaction with less than 2% business transactions taking place electronically.
    Sentence 3 : Welfare loss for the currency using population: Most active segments of the population who constitute the ‘base of the pyramid’ uses currency to meet their transactions.
cluster 141
    Sentence 1 : Many now argue that the process of demonetization had little impact on balck money, given that 99 per cent of the notes were surrendered back to the bank.
    Sentence 2 : 10 per cent hold upto 85 per cent. Now these are the rich fellows, who will be having even larger proportion of the black money.
    Sentence 3 : However, these policies, coupled with two global trends, should have propelled India to a growth rate of over 8 per cent, the kind it had achieved before 2008," Basu wrote.
    Sentence 4 : One per cent of Indians hold 53 per cent of total assets in India.
    Sentence 5 : This was found to be about 0.028 per cent of the total currency in circulation.
    Sentence 6 : Of the all the returned Rs 500 notes, 0.002 per cent was counterfeit.
    Sentence 7 : According to the Payments Council of India, the growth rate of the digital payments industry accelerated post-demonetisation by 40-70 per cent. It was earlier in the range of 20-50 per cent. The spike in digital transactions was evident soon after demonetisation but it saw decline in the subsequent months with remonetisation eased currency shortage.
    Sentence 8 : This means, about 99 per cent of the demonetised currency came back to the banking system by June 30.
    Sentence 9 : This growth rate was unexpected as the Central Statistics Office earlier in January had estimated 7.1 per cent growth as compared to the 7.6 per cent in 2015-16.
    Sentence 10 : Earlier this year, a report suggested that of all the returned Rs 1000 notes, only 0.0007 per cent was found to be counterfeit.
cluster 142
    Sentence 1 : In fact, we will, obviously, assume that some people do the one, some the other, and many do either dependent upon their whims.
    Sentence 2 : White Into Black: As Indian, we do believe in cash.
cluster 143
    Sentence 1 : The Indian National Congress spokesperson Randeep Surjewala welcomed the move but remained sceptical on the consequences that would follow.
cluster 144
    Sentence 1 : Believe me, public dealing is a very tough job and when you have 300 hassled brains in front of you, it becomes horrible.
    Sentence 2 : Instead of distributing all, you circulate only 80 pieces.
    Sentence 3 : Now for the fulfilment of the requirement, government will provide you 20 more potatoes, out of them you circulate only 16 and this keeps going on.
cluster 145
    Sentence 1 : The above points are all short -term disadvantages, clearly indicating that the surprise and sudden nullification of Rs 500 and 100 notes is a master stoke by the NDA government which will cut deep into the black money and corruption market.
    Sentence 2 : All of the above mentioned points will lead to the decrease in inflation which will automatically increase deflation rate.
cluster 146
    Sentence 1 : If the smaller short-term risks, especially those emanating from the demand side are addressed carefully, if we undertake a holistic net cost benefit analysis, the expected results seem to be promising.
    Sentence 2 : The long term effects are yet to be experienced and felt.
    Sentence 3 : If we somehow try to manage short-term discomfort which we all are going to face in the coming days then positive aspects are really great to consider.
    Sentence 4 : The long term effects of Demonetisation are yet to be ascertained.
    Sentence 5 : It has had many short term effects which are visible.
cluster 147
    Sentence 1 : This led to speculation about whether and when the ministers had deposited the cash they held.
    Sentence 2 : The devil, as they say, is in the detail.
    Sentence 3 : Several government ministers had declared before the demonetisation that they were holding large amounts of cash, including Arun Jaitley, who had more than 65 lakh rupees in cash.
    Sentence 4 : The overnight decision changed the life of many as black money holders were worried about the pile of cash they were sitting on.
cluster 148
    Sentence 1 : "The demonetisation campaign clearly contributed to economic slowdown, reflected in poor GDP figures in April-June.
    Sentence 2 : Expectations are that the GDP figures for June-September would show a revival trend.
cluster 149
    Sentence 1 : Negative Effects As government has announced it in a hastiness, it may effect its execution.
    Sentence 2 : The Harvard Business Review called it "a case study in poor policy and even poorer execution"
cluster 150
    Sentence 1 : In 2012, the Central Board of Direct Taxes had recommended against demonetisation, saying in a report that "demonetisation may not be a solution for tackling black money or shadow economy, which is largely held in the form of benami properties, bullion and jewellery."
    Sentence 2 : Gold: Now since the black money stored in cash gone in one shot, the corrupt may start saving their black money in some other easy investment to avoid any loss in future and the easiest option might be keeping them in gold and silver so that they can be en-cashed with ease in future.
    Sentence 3 : Shourie further argued: "People who hold the black money or those who have black assets, they don't hold them in cash.
    Sentence 4 : Pronab Sen, former Chief Statistician and Planning Commission of India member, called it a "hollow move" since it did not really address any of the purported goals of tackling black money or fake currency.
    Sentence 5 : The statistics revealed that either the hoarders found a way to legitimize their black money or did not hold them in the form of cash.
    Sentence 6 : The conventional explanation for this is that most people who had black money found other people, who did not have black money, to deposit their savings into the banking system for them.
cluster 151
    Sentence 1 : Addressing a rally in Himachal Pradesh yesterday, PM Narendra Modi yesterday said, "Rs 4,000 crore fraud found in probe into 5,000 companies out of 3 lakh that have shut down after demonetisation."
    Sentence 2 : Earlier, the government said that 1.63 lakh companies were shut down across the country on the basis of data mined after demonetisation.
    Sentence 3 : Small shopkeepers who only accepted cash went into losses and some even shut down.
cluster 152
    Sentence 1 : The GDP can decline by about 3 per cent due to this move", while he also questioned "I would like to ask the Prime Minister examples of countries where people have deposited their money in the banks and not allowed to withdraw their own money." and later also said "It is no good that on each day banks bring out new notifications.
    Sentence 2 : He stated that "What India has done is commit a massive theft of people's property without even the pretense of due process--a shocking move for a democratically elected government."
    Sentence 3 : And my own feeling is that the national income, that is the GDP, can decline by about 2 per cent as a result of what has been done.
cluster 153
    Sentence 1 : Read Also: Arun Jaitley defends GDP figures, demonetisation Last year, when the Prime Minister demonetised old Rs 500 and Rs 1000 currency notes it was feared that the country's economy would be severely hit.
    Sentence 2 : A year after the country was wiped out of old currency, the effects of Narendra Modi’s demonetization can still be felt in the economy.
    Sentence 3 : One year down the line, the jury is still out on the success of the Narendra Modi government's decision to discontinue about 15.4 lakh crore of currencies in denominations of Rs 500 and Rs 1000.
cluster 154
    Sentence 1 : However, let me point out few reasons which were the positive part of this decision was1) To stop the funds that were transferred by terrorists, 2) Put an end to the circulation of fake currency notes, 3) Wiping off the corruption of black money 4) Bring up the indian economy for a better tomorrow including real-estate and gold where most black money were grounded 5) Digitalization being the forte (pic: feegenie) Digitalizing India to have a cashless policy where every Indian would either use online transactions or swipe their card for the smallest of uses.
    Sentence 2 : Although this demonetising step has the potential to pin down the small rogues, scrape off the illegal transactions in real estate, gold and other sectors where circulation of unaccounted money was vigorous.
    Sentence 3 : Various unaccounted money in the form of real-estate and gold were discovered from certain section of people.
cluster 155
    Sentence 1 : Foreign travelers: Tourists in India will have to queue in banks to get the notes changed.
    Sentence 2 : Positive Effects Foreign Trust: Transparency is always welcomed, specially in business.
cluster 156
    Sentence 1 : But they can’t follow it in the long term.
    Sentence 2 : But the unmeasurable benefits of having more transparency and reduced volume of black money activities can be pointed as long term benefits.
    Sentence 3 : Former Chief Election Commissioner of India S. Y. Quraishi said demonetisation could lead to long term electoral reforms.
cluster 157
    Sentence 1 : The total value of the fake currency notes identified by the banks of the returned demonetised currency is Rs 41 crore.
    Sentence 2 : Although Indian news reports have identified Nepalese citizens has holding an estimated Rs 3,200 crore, sources tell The Wire that Nepal is yet to come up with an accurate estimate on the total number of Indian banknotes in the country.
    Sentence 3 : The total value of fake notes discovered over the last year was Rs 41 crore – a far cry from the Rs 2,000 crore figure that Debroy claims is still circulating in the Indian economy.
    Sentence 4 : Niti Aayog member and economist Bibek Debroy, in the months after demonetisation, claimed that the total value of counterfeit or fake Indian currency was in the range of Rs 2,000 crore.
    Sentence 5 : Although news reports have indicated that the country holds Rs 3,000 crore worth of banned Indian currency, the sourcing of this figure is not clear.
cluster 158
    Sentence 1 : According to data from income tax probes, black money holders kept only 6% or less of their wealth as cash, suggesting that targeting this cash would not be a successful strategy.
    Sentence 2 : Also, Sitaram Yechury from Communist Party of India, questioned the government on the demonetisation move by stating "only 6% of black money in India is in cash to drive his point that demonetisation won't curb illicit wealth."
    Sentence 3 : In India, the cash deposited into hundis, or cash collection boxes in temples and gurudwaras are exempted from inquiry by the tax department.
cluster 159
    Sentence 1 : Deflation: Deflation refers to situation, where there is decline in general price levels.
    Sentence 2 : On the General Economic Situation: Till months after demonetisation the general economic situation was disturbed.
cluster 160
    Sentence 1 : A poor woman who was unable to get her old notes exchanged stripped outside the RBI office in desperation.OCIs and PIOs were also not allowed to exchange old notes.
    Sentence 2 : Citizens were given time till December 31, 2016 to deposit their old currency notes and exchange them for the new currency notes of rupee 500 and 2000.
    Sentence 3 : However, the government allowed only NRIs to deposit old notes after 31 December 2016.
    Sentence 4 : The government had initially announced that any person who is unable to deposit the old notes by 31 December 2016 would be given an opportunity to do so until a later date.
cluster 161
    Sentence 1 : They have also switched to virtual wallets like Paytm which allows electronic transfer of money.
    Sentence 2 : Everyone like to have their money in safe hands.
cluster 162
    Sentence 1 : The Indian Supreme Court while hearing one among a slew of cases filed against the sudden demonetisation decision in various courts, observed that it "appears to be carpet bombing and not surgical strike" which government repeatedly claims it to be.
    Sentence 2 : Similar PILs were also filed in the Supreme Court of India.Supreme Court of India is yet to decide on the matter.
    Sentence 3 : The Supreme Court of India also questioned the government on this matter.
cluster 163
    Sentence 1 : Therefore, the government failed in its aim of purging black money from the economy.
    Sentence 2 : The sole aim of the ban was to curb black money generation in the country.
    Sentence 3 : The aim is to wash the stock of "black money" out of the economy and get it into the licit, banked and taxable, part of the economy.
cluster 164
    Sentence 1 : Some farmers dumped their produce in protest against the government.
    Sentence 2 : Some farmers resorted to burying unsold vegetables.
    Sentence 3 : Some even died in the process.
cluster 165
    Sentence 1 : A reading above 50 indicates growth and a reading below shows contraction.
    Sentence 2 : Lets say 40 days are working out of 50.
cluster 166
    Sentence 1 : Infosys founder N. R. Narayana Murthy praised the move.
cluster 167
    Sentence 1 : A demonetization is a tool useful for eradication of black money.
    Sentence 2 : A creditor is obliged by law to receive such money in payment of due debt to him.
cluster 168
    Sentence 1 : Further, Ambit Capital estimates that during the October to December quarter that we are currently in, the GDP growth may contract, thus showing negative growth.
    Sentence 2 : We expect this dynamic to crimp GDP growth in India in FY18 as well and hence we have cut our FY18 GDP growth estimate to 5.8 per cent YoY (from 7.3 per cent)," Ambit economists Ritika Mankar Mukherjee, Sumit Shekhar and Prashant Mittal said in a note.
    Sentence 3 : However, Ambit is hopeful that a strong formalisation of the informal economy will ensue through 2017 until 2019 and this disruption could also crimp GDP growth in 2017-18 to 5.8 % from their earlier estimate of 7.3%.
cluster 169
    Sentence 1 : There seems to have been some impact on the stock of black money (rather than the flow), given that the construction sector has been hit hard.
    Sentence 2 : The slowdown in the economy, which started before demonetisation, also seems to have been exacerbated by demonetisation.
cluster 170
    Sentence 1 : It will be a little difficult for a family person to survive with this amount.
    Sentence 2 : Long queues will not allow a person to get money on time.
cluster 171
    Sentence 1 : "India will grow faster than China even after this (demonetisation) slow down.
    Sentence 2 : Kishore Mahbubani An Indian-origin academic and former Singapore diplomat Kishore Mahbubani said Indian economy would grow faster than China despite the temporary slowdown created by demonetisation.
cluster 172
    Sentence 1 : Things will not change on that front.
cluster 173
    Sentence 1 : Rural consumer sentiment too took a hit, with domestic sales of two-wheelers plunging sharply.
    Sentence 2 : Car sales also declined but the decline was less severe than in the case of two-wheelers.
cluster 174
    Sentence 1 : As seen from the table above, the RBI does note that the amount of “suspicious transactions” reported by various financial institutions in India has increased sharply.
    Sentence 2 : TACKLING COUNTERFEIT CURRENCY As per the records available in public domain till date, demonetisation does not seem to have been a blow to fake currency business.
    Sentence 3 : As can be seen from the table above, in 2015-16, roughly 143,099 ‘Rs 1,000 notes’ were detected as fake or counterfeit.
cluster 175
    Sentence 1 : However, by 30 December 2016, approximately 97% of the demonetised banknotes, or ?14.97 trillion ($220 billion) of the ?15.4 trillion that had been demonetised, had been deposited with the banking system.
    Sentence 2 : The government had estimated that ?3 trillion, or approximately 20%, of the demonetised notes would be permanently removed from circulation.
cluster 176
    Sentence 1 : Towards end of March approximately 10000 mn units will be printed and replaced.
    Sentence 2 : Nearly 16000 mn Rs 500 notes were in circulation as on end March 2016.
cluster 177
    Sentence 1 : Data from the RBI annual report tells us that the total number of fake 500 rupee (old series) and 1,000 rupee notes detected between April 2016 and March 2017 was 573,891.
    Sentence 2 : But the RBI report tells a different story.
cluster 178
    Sentence 1 : The opposite of demonetization is remonetization, in which a form of payment is restored as legal tender.
    Sentence 2 : Demonetization DEFINITION of 'Demonetization' Demonetization is the act of stripping a currency unit of its status as legal tender.
    Sentence 3 : There is a visible tendency to hoard available legal tender in denominations of Rs 100 and below as emergency funds.
    Sentence 4 : On November 8, 2016, the Indian government declared that the 500 and 1000 rupee notes will be stripped of their status as legal tender effective from midnight.
    Sentence 5 : One year of demonetisation: How much note ban has changed India To break the grip of corruption and black money, we have decided that the 500 rupee and 1,000 rupee currency notes presently in use will no longer be legal tender from midnight tonight, that is, 8th November 2016."
    Sentence 6 : Effects Of Demonetisation On India's GDP - Difficult To Calculate, We Don't Even Know The Sign The demonetisation effort being led by PM Modi in India is that idea that Rs 500 and Rs 1,000 notes should be declared no longer legal tender, to be replaced by other notes of different designs and in one case, denominations.
    Sentence 7 : PM Modi has just addressed the Country and announced that Rs 500 and Rs 1000 notes will be ceased to legal tender from the midnight ( 8 Nov, 2016).
    Sentence 8 : When a currency note of a particular denomination ceases to be a legal tender, it is termed as demonetisation.
    Sentence 9 : When 86 per cent of a country’s legal tender becomes illegal, it is but expected that finding ‘a new level of equilibrium’ would require time.
cluster 179
    Sentence 1 : This means that the government can expect to see the benefits of taxation on previously hidden black money over the coming months and years.
    Sentence 2 : Hoping to see the world of digitalization strike in India and making the people aware of benefits of transacting digitally.
cluster 180
    Sentence 1 : They're locked out of that easier world where matters are settled in large amounts of cash, where tax is not paid and where favours are bought.
    Sentence 2 : India's finance ministry says it is probing 1.8 million bank accounts where cash inflows during the demonetization period "did not appear in line with its tax profile," meaning it can expect some belated tax payments.
cluster 181
    Sentence 1 : Agricultural produce such as vegetables, foodgrains, sugarcane, milk and eggs were dumped on roads.
    Sentence 2 : When the physical euro bills and coins were introduced, the old national currencies, such as the German mark, the French franc and the Italian lira were demonetized.
cluster 182
    Sentence 1 : The major reason being that it's too complicated and we can never gain enough information to be able to do so.
    Sentence 2 : We could assume that those who commit their nefarities with black money quickly move that on so as to be able to gain more.
cluster 183
    Sentence 1 : Demonetisation has badly hit Maoist and Naxalites as well.
    Sentence 2 : Conclusion Demonetisation has been praised as well as criticised on various grounds.
    Sentence 3 : Demonetisation is expected to reduce inflation as consumers have cut down on spending and aggregate demand has considerably fallen.
cluster 184
    Sentence 1 : But when they will face hurdles in their routine jobs due to shortage of money then it will be their patience which will make this historic move a success story.
    Sentence 2 : But even this lack of data in the public domain did not stop economists from coming up with their own sets of numbers, trying to defend the decision of the Modi government, and failing to explain what logic they based their assumptions on.
    Sentence 3 : But they will also not let their hard-earned cash to become worthless paper.
cluster 185
    Sentence 1 : Labour union jobs were crashed The Finance Ministry instructed all revenue intelligence agencies to join the crackdown on forex traders, hawala operators and jewellers besides tracking movement of demonetised currency notes.
cluster 186
    Sentence 1 : This announcement was in contrast to the regular practice of keeping seized cash in strong rooms until tax cases had been ruled upon in the courts.
cluster 187
    Sentence 1 : A Congress led opposition which includes 13 political parties, opposed the current government on the demonetisation issue in the Winter Session of the Indian Parliament on 16 November 2016.
    Sentence 2 : In the demonetisation debate on the second and third day of the Winter Session of Parliament, on 17 and 18 November 2016, the opposition and the government clashed over the demonetisation issue, bringing the house to continuous halts.
    Sentence 3 : The debate on demonetisation is known to be initiated by Indian National Congress and Anand Sharma in the Rajya Sabha on 16 November 2016, while Banerjee is known to be the first to oppose the current government on the demonetisation.
    Sentence 4 : In the demonetisation debate on the first day of the winter session of Parliament at the Rajya Sabha, Pramod Tiwari from the Indian National Congress compared Narendra Modi to Benito Mussolini, Adolf Hitler and Muammar Gaddafi.Prem Chand Gupta, a member of the Rashtriya Janata Dal, questioned a statement of Modi from the unscheduled TV broadcast on 8 November, "If it was planned 10 months ago, how did RBI Governor Urjit Patel sign on new note?".
cluster 188
    Sentence 1 : There was a loss of jobs due to demonetisation, particularly in the unorganised and informal sector and in small enterprises.
    Sentence 2 : Workers in the unorganised sector, petty shopkeepers and small businesses are finding it difficult to cope.
    Sentence 3 : The effect on urban consumers, small and large businesses will be prominent as this move will seem to be crippling down in the sort-term.
    Sentence 4 : The small artisans and street vendors will be most impacted.
cluster 189
    Sentence 1 : The opinion of the masses varied both ways on micro-blogs and social media sites like Twitter.
cluster 190
    Sentence 1 : Farmers were unable to recover even the costs of transportation from their fields to the market from the low prices offered.
    Sentence 2 : The prices dropped as low as 50 paise per kilo for tomatoes and onions.
    Sentence 3 : As a combined effect of demonetisation and US presidential election, the stock market indices dropped to an around six-month low in the week following the announcement.
cluster 191
    Sentence 1 : V would be very low therefore.
    Sentence 2 : Satyarthi said the demonetisation would be effective in combating exploitation of children as well as corruption and would be a great obstacle to traffickers.
    Sentence 3 : V in the informal economy would be high therefore.
cluster 192
    Sentence 1 : And perhaps the biggest effect is, as I've said, that large portions of the population feel that the basic system is unfair.
    Sentence 2 : The microeconomic effects here seem, as I've said before, to be beneficial.
    Sentence 3 : We've got a good idea of what V, velocity, is in the formal economy.
    Sentence 4 : Which means that we've simply got no idea at all, not that scoobie, about what the overall effect is.
cluster 193
    Sentence 1 : Impact on counterfeit currency: the real impact will be on counterfeit/fake currency as its circulation will be checked after this exercise.
    Sentence 2 : Effectively, this will make Rs 2000 less useful as a transaction currency though it can be a store value denomination.
    Sentence 3 : Fake currency circulation will come to a halt in a single shot.
cluster 194
    Sentence 1 : This move is likely to improve tax compliance, given that the Goods and Services Tax (GST) is also on its way to become reality.
    Sentence 2 : Demonetisation further got integrated with the Goods and Services Tax (GST) rollout.
    Sentence 3 : The World Bank has reduced the India GDP growth forecast to 7% for 2017-18 owing to demonetization and GST (Goods and Service tax).
cluster 195
    Sentence 1 : However by ‘money’, it does not mean the cash that we exchange in day-to-day transactions (part of something called high powered money or M0).
    Sentence 2 : Chaos ensued in the cash-dependent economy (some 78% of all Indian customer transactions are in cash), as long, snaking lines formed outside ATMs and banks, which had to shut down for a day.
cluster 196
    Sentence 1 : This means the GDP growth for six months, from October 2016 to March 2017, could decelerate to 0.5%, down from 6.4% in the previous six months.
    Sentence 2 : The GDP growth rate of 8.01% in 2015-2016 fell to 7.11% in 2016-2017 after demonetisation.
    Sentence 3 : It's actually possible for this to run either way: Ambit Capital, a respected Mumbai-based equity research firm, has officially estimated that the demonetisation-driven cash crunch will result in GDP growth crashing to 0.5% in the second half of financial year 2016-17.
    Sentence 4 : GDP growth rate increased from 5.46% in 2012-13 to 8.01% in the year 2015-16.
    Sentence 5 : It was estimated that this decrease in income for the government could cause the fiscal deficit for the financial year 2016-17 to increase from the targeted 3.2% to 3.4%.
    Sentence 6 : It registered a growth of 7.11 % from previous year as compared to the 8.01% growth witnessed during 2015-16.
cluster 197
    Sentence 1 : ATMs were running out of cash after a few hours of being functional, and around half the ATMs in the country were non-functional.
    Sentence 2 : Media captionOld 500 and 1,000 rupee notes went out of circulation in a few hours At midnight, just hours after the announcement, the 500 and 1,000 rupee notes were worthless.
cluster 198
    Sentence 1 : The transgenders and prostitutes keep all of their money in cash with themselves.
    Sentence 2 : The Disadvantaged lot: Old people, disabled, sick, transgenders and prostitutes will be especially impacted.
cluster 199
    Sentence 1 : The key here is patience.
    Sentence 2 : However, we should also think about the macroeconomic effects here.
    Sentence 3 : Advantages are a too many to cover here.
    Sentence 4 : However, look at our problem here.
cluster 200
    Sentence 1 : HOW MONEY FOUND WAY TO BANKS?
cluster 201
    Sentence 1 : However, until 2000-01, the share of high value notes (i.e notes with value greater than Rs 500) was only 26.7 percent of the total currency in circulation.
    Sentence 2 : On January 16, 1978, Rs 1,000, Rs 5,000 and Rs 10,000 currency notes were scrapped through an ordinance, impacting 0.6 percent of the total currency in circulation at the time.
    Sentence 3 : (The salary of an entry-level government officer in 1978 was well below Rs 1,000.) Rs 100 was the highest denomination in circulation until October 1987, when Rs 500 notes were re-introduced, followed by the re-introduction of Rs 1,000 notes in November 2000.
    Sentence 4 : When it comes to the type of notes counterfeited in 2014-15, RBI data showed that counterfeited Rs 500 notes were most common, with 273,923 recorded.
    Sentence 5 : According to the National Investigation Agency, counterfeit currencies worth only Rs 400 crore were in circulation in 2015.
    Sentence 6 : Rs 100 and Rs 1000 notes were the second and third most counterfeited bills, respectively (source).
    Sentence 7 : However, both the notes were reintroduced in 1954 with an additional introduction of Rs 5,000 currency.
cluster 202
    Sentence 1 : This led to the acceleration of installation of POS machines According to data of Pine Labs, the demand for its POS machines doubled after the decision.
    Sentence 2 : More people began using cards and e-wallets, and the demand for point of sales (POS) or card swipe machines increased.
cluster 203
    Sentence 1 : The critics argue that either the banks failed to distinguish counterfeit currencies from the genuine ones on mass scale or the counterfeit currency did not exist in the measure expected by the government.
    Sentence 2 : The government’s restriction on daily withdrawal amounts added to the misery, though a waiver on transaction fees did help a bit.
    Sentence 3 : The government did not pay heed to the fact that they may not be in power by the next elections, still took a step towards a better tomorrow.
cluster 204
    Sentence 1 : Demonetization has played a crucial role in bringing digitalization and financial planning into the forefront for many.
    Sentence 2 : Further, pre-GST uncertainty is said to have played a major role in production sluggishness in April-June period this fiscal.
cluster 205
    Sentence 1 : Agriculture grew by 2.3% in Q1 of 2017-18 as compared to 2.5% in Q1 of 2016-17, Construction grew at a rate of 2.3% in Q1 of 2017-18 and witnessed a drop of 0.2% since the Q1 of 2016-17.
    Sentence 2 : The Indian officials said: "The number of returns filed as on August 5 stands at 2,82,92,955 as against 2,26,97,843 filed during the corresponding period of the fiscal year 2016-2017, registering an increase of 24.7% compared to growth rate of 9.9% in the previous year."
    Sentence 3 : Advance tax collections of personal income tax (i.e. other than corporate tax) as on 5 August 2017, showed a growth of about 41.79% over the corresponding period in FY 2016-2017.
    Sentence 4 : This shows a decline in growth from 7.6% in 2016-17 to 5.6% in 2017-18 (see table 2) Sectors in the economy such as Construction, Agriculture, Forestry & Fishing which employ a large number of daily wage workers and have liquidity preference witnessed a decline in growth.
    Sentence 5 : The number of I-T returns filed for 2016-17 grew by 25 per cent to 2.82 crore, and the advance tax collections during that period rose 41.8% over the 1-year period, as increased number of individuals filed their tax returns post demonetisation.
    Sentence 6 : Personal income tax under self-assessment tax (SAT) grew at 34.25% over the corresponding period in FY 2016-2017.
    Sentence 7 : It grew by only 1.2% in Q1 of 2017-18 as compared to a massive growth of 10.7% in Q1 of 2016-17.
cluster 206
    Sentence 1 : Here is an example.
    Sentence 2 : Here, ‘you’ refers to market.
cluster 207
    Sentence 1 : Current reports indicate that all security printing press can print only 2000 million units of RS 500 notes by the end of this year.
    Sentence 2 : Some portion of this were filled by the new Rs 2000 notes.
    Sentence 3 : Government just can’t order RBI to print new notes as per requirement.
    Sentence 4 : Instead of Rs 1000, the new Rs 2000 introduced not only these the RBI printed new RS 200 notes.
    Sentence 5 : The cash ban had forced the RBI to print new notes and in new denominations.
cluster 208
    Sentence 1 : This was less than half the dividend of Rs 65.9 lakh crore paid by the RBI in 2015-16.
    Sentence 2 : Contrary to what some economists predicted, the dividend from RBI to the government was lower because of demonetisation.
    Sentence 3 : The dividend paid by the Reserve Bank to the government for the financial year 2016-17 was Rs.
cluster 209
    Sentence 1 : Most of the FICN are printed in Pakistan.
    Sentence 2 : Most of the savings are obtained by biggie public sector banks like the SBI.
cluster 210
    Sentence 1 : “That people have been compelled to deposit even black money into banks is itself a good evidence of its [success].” graphJPG Mr. Jaitley said that the high growth in income tax returns and the robust GST inflows indicated that more and more people now preferred to undertake ‘white money’ transactions.
    Sentence 2 : ALSO READ Objective of demonetisation was not confiscation of money, says Arun Jaitley “With RBI disclosing the numbers of returned notes today [Wednesday] and the measure having been successfully implemented, the debate should be over,” said Economic Affairs Secretary Subhash Garg.
    Sentence 3 : “The factual position right now is that RBI and NRB [Nepal’s central bank] have yet to reach a decision,” a senior government official told The Wire.
cluster 211
    Sentence 1 : Loss of Growth momentum– India risks its position of being the fastest growing largest economy: reduced consumption, income, investment etc. may reduce India’s GDP growth as the liquidity impact itself may last three -four months.
    Sentence 2 : With this March quarter report, India lost its status as the world's fastest growing major economy.
    Sentence 3 : There was concern that the uncertainty and short-term liquidity squeeze would take some momentum off the Indian economy, the fastest-growing in the world; in particular, sectors like real estate, notorious as a harbor for cash dealings and black money, were expected to take a hit, with "luxury property prices dipping by as much as 25-30%," said Ashwinder Raj Singh, CEO of Residential Services, JLL India.
cluster 212
    Sentence 1 : So decreased black money will surely help Indian government to gain trust from foreign investors.
    Sentence 2 : *Includes RBI-regulated eight All-India Financial Institutions, insurance companies, housing finance institutions, non-banking financial companies, chit-funds etc. **Includes intermediaries registered with SEBI, viz., stock brokers, merchant bankers, portfolio managers, foreign institutional investors, etc. Another inference from most of the money returning is that the I-T department has a lot of work ahead of itself in analysing the money has returned.
    Sentence 3 : It is the most important gradient for foreign investors.
cluster 213
    Sentence 1 : Thus we just don't know what the macroeconomic effect of demonetisation is going to be.
    Sentence 2 : And the thought it provokes in me is that we just don't know.
    Sentence 3 : And that's difficult--because we're not even sure what the sign of the effect will be, positive or negative, let alone the size of it.
    Sentence 4 : We don't even know, again, what the sign on the effect will be, positive or negative, let alone the size of it.
    Sentence 5 : And we don't know what it is in the informal or black economy.
cluster 214
    Sentence 1 : However, as the flow of cash into the economy began to increase, the use of these apps and digital wallets saw a slide once again.
    Sentence 2 : However concerns were raised regarding the lack security of mobile apps used for digital transactions.
cluster 215
    Sentence 1 : Increased Income Tax Revenue: It would be an exaggeration to say that all black money holders will deposit all of their stored cash into bank accounts.
    Sentence 2 : Government has given us 50 days to deposit all our cash money into our bank accounts.
cluster 216
    Sentence 1 : The government expects that the twin measures would pay rich dividends in terms of revenue to carry out its social welfare and development programmes while cracking down on black money.
    Sentence 2 : People are now much convinced about the need to fight black income. such a nationwide awareness and urge will encourage government to come out with even strong measures.
cluster 217
    Sentence 1 : The initial turmoil to any huge change can be adjusted however, when common man being effected for an unexplained period of time makes them anxious and weary about the situation.
    Sentence 2 : It makes sense when benefits of demonetization are higher.
cluster 218
    Sentence 1 : So, if velocity of money calculated using broad money is 1.3, then it equates to six-times the amount, or 7.8 with respect to cash in circulation.
    Sentence 2 : M3 and M0 in India are linked by a factor of 6—so roughly speaking, R1 of cash in circulation, ultimately adds up to R6 worth of broad money.
    Sentence 3 : Which is surprisingly difficult to work out: In mathematical terms, velocity of money is the ratio between GDP and money in circulation—which RBI estimates to be around 1.3 for India.
cluster 219
    Sentence 1 : Steve Forbes described the move as 'Sickening And Immoral'.
    Sentence 2 : Prabhat Patnaik, a former professor of economics at the Jawaharlal Nehru University, Delhi called the move 'witless' and 'anti-people'.
cluster 220
    Sentence 1 : In hindsight, this can be deemed a failure from an economic point of view," Firat Unlu, leading India analyst at the Economist Intelligence Unit, told CNBC.
    Sentence 2 : "The government and its supporters can argue that even if demonetization failed to remove black money from circulation, that at least Modi and the government tried to do something about it," Riser-Kositsky told CNBC via email.
cluster 221
    Sentence 1 : The Reserve Bank of India stipulated that the demonetised notes could be deposited with banks over a period of fifty days until 30 December 2016.
    Sentence 2 : The banknotes could also be exchanged for legal tender over the counter at all banks.
    Sentence 3 : True though that the act could be a start of a new economy for India.
    Sentence 4 : This money could later be withdrawn, though there were restrictions on the amount of money that could be withdrawn immediately.
cluster 222
    Sentence 1 : Demonetisation did provide a boost to non-cash payments in the short term but that effect may be waning, with the cash-to-GDP ratio back to double-digits.
    Sentence 2 : Hence, hopes of a reduction in interest rates have already been diminished with short-term negative impacts on bank profitability.
    Sentence 3 : Mr. Garg called for a conclusion of note-ban linked arguments as the “short-term negative impacts on economic activity had played out fully and long-term positives will continue to strengthen fundamentals.” The final deposit figures could still rise since on June 20, 2017, the government allowed District Central Cooperative Banks to deposit the withdrawn notes that had been accepted by them from customers between November 10-14.
    Sentence 4 : Demonetisation - The long and short of it India has a long-standing relationship with demonetisation.
    Sentence 5 : While there will be an immediate dip in demand and negative short-term impacts on the economy coupled with hardships for citizens, demonetisation, as a policy measure, certainly has large-scale positive effects.
cluster 223
    Sentence 1 : As per the estimates of the Central Statistics Office, all the sectors of the economy faced different situations in Q1 of the financial year 2017-18.
    Sentence 2 : According to these estimates, the GVA at constant prices in Q1 of 2017-18 was rupees 2904128 crores as compared to rupees 2751407 crores in the Q1 of the previous financial year.
cluster 224
    Sentence 1 : In the previous year, the total number of counterfeit 500 and 1,000 rupee notes detected stood at 404,794.
    Sentence 2 : The total number of notes withdrawn stood at 24.02bn.
cluster 225
    Sentence 1 : On Inflation: The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) considers the Wholesale price index (WPI) and the Consumer Price Index (CPI) to measure inflation.
    Sentence 2 : The growth in eight core sectors such as cement, steel and refinery products, which constitute 38% of the Index of Industrial Production (IIP), was only to 4.9 percent in November as compared with 6.6 percent in October.
    Sentence 3 : The liquidity squeeze led to a pile-up at wholesale markets, leading to a sharp decline in the Wholesale Price Index (WPI) of perishables such as fruits and vegetables in the immediate aftermath of demonetisation.
cluster 226
    Sentence 1 : There was a reduction in industrial output as industries were hit by the cash crisis.
    Sentence 2 : India's large cash economy was badly hit by the policy.
    Sentence 3 : Agriculture, a sector which largely operates on cash, was hard hit too, with farmers not being paid enough for vegetables and pulses they had grown.
    Sentence 4 : The unorganised sector, which forms a major part of the Indian economy, is likely to take a transitory hit as this sector operates mainly on a cash basis.
cluster 227
    Sentence 1 : It is no doubt a bold step taken by the government which will definitely help India to become corruption-free.
    Sentence 2 : But people were disappointed when there was no major step taken by the current government.
    Sentence 3 : This will help in maintaining harmony and discipline among people and the crocodiles out there to fill the country with filth would step back from corruption.
cluster 228
    Sentence 1 : But politics aside, analysts claim that the economic benefits will emerge over time.
    Sentence 2 : Since then it has been a widely debated topic, with analysts and economists wondering whether the benefits trumped the costs.
cluster 229
    Sentence 1 : There can be many cases of cheating as well due to lack of knowledge and awareness of people.
    Sentence 2 : Also, general day to day purchase may be impacted due to lack of cash in hand.
    Sentence 3 : Panic and awareness: There will be a panic like situation for many cash holders due to lack of awareness.
cluster 230
    Sentence 1 : Infact many government hospitals and medicine stores refrained from accepting 500 and 1000 rupees notes which was not as per the declaration by PM.
    Sentence 2 : Patients: Government hospitals have been allowed to accept old Rs 500 and Rs 1000 notes.
    Sentence 3 : Fuel pumps, government hospitals, railway and airline booking counters, state-government recognised dairies and ration stores, and crematoriums were allowed to accept the banned ?500 and ?1,000 bank notes until 2 December 2016.
cluster 231
    Sentence 1 : Even those dispensing bills of lower denominations faced shortages.
cluster 232
    Sentence 1 : All other sudden demonetisations have occurred in the context of hyperinflation, wars, political upheavals or other extreme circumstances."
    Sentence 2 : Traditionally, other governments have only embarked on demonetization schemes in times of extreme need, such as hyperinflation, political upheaval and wars.
cluster 233
    Sentence 1 : People petitioned the courts to allow deposit of the old banknotes.
    Sentence 2 : Deaths were also attributed to lack of medical help due to refusal of old banknotes by hospitals.
cluster 234
    Sentence 1 : The department carried out a total of 983 search, survey and enquiry operations under the provisions of the Income Tax Act and has issued 5,027 notices to various entities on charges of tax evasion and hawala-like dealings.
    Sentence 2 : Corrupt officers, money launderers are under threat as Income tax department is taking all the measures to track such people.
    Sentence 3 : Also, deposit up to Rs 2.5 lakh will not come under Income tax scrutiny.
    Sentence 4 : The Income Tax department seized Rs.
cluster 235
    Sentence 1 : They use cash to meet all their expenses and demonetisation has resulted in a lot of them losing their jobs due to unavailability of cash.
    Sentence 2 : The demonetisation led to unavailability of cash to pay for food products.
cluster 236
    Sentence 1 : In 2016-2017, another 925 million pieces of ₹1,000 notes were supplied into the system by the currency printing presses.
    Sentence 2 : The numbers come as part of the RBI’s annual report, which also shows that out of the 6.7 billion Rs 1,000 notes, 89 million notes are still in circulation and therefore have not come back into the system.
    Sentence 3 : Data in the annual report showed that only 89 million pieces of ₹1,000 were not deposited.
    Sentence 4 : Demonetisation: Nearly 99% of Scrapped Notes Came Back into System Roughly 89 million of the 6.7 billion Rs 1,000 notes in existence were not deposited following demonetisation and still remain in circulation.
    Sentence 5 : The politics of demonetisation As of March 2016, there were 6,326 million pieces of ₹1,000 banknotes in circulation.
cluster 237
    Sentence 1 : Their life savings are in cash amount.
    Sentence 2 : The savings with the banks are actually liquid cash people stored.
    Sentence 3 : These are not voluntary savings aimed to get interest.
cluster 238
    Sentence 1 : The PMI report showed also showed that the reduction in inflation in November was due to shortage in money supply.
    Sentence 2 : The Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI) fell to 46.7 in November from 54.5 in October, recording its sharpest reduction in three years.
cluster 239
    Sentence 1 : The estimated employment during this period was 405 million as compared to 406.5 million during the previous four months.
    Sentence 2 : The utmost that indian citizens can give away during this crisis is patience as they work hard, pays tax and compromises to anything that could be good for the country.
    Sentence 3 : Most private entities and organisation neither compromised nor came as a help to common citizens during this crisis, as they were afraid of being penalised by the government.
cluster 240
    Sentence 1 : The opposition parties expressed their concerns over job loss and slow down in informal sector, but the government agencies maintained that impact would be short-term and marginal.
    Sentence 2 : We expect a strong 'formalisation effect' to play out as nearly half of the non-tax paying businesses in the informal sector (40% share in GDP) will become unviable and cede market share to their organised sector counterparts.
    Sentence 3 : The informal sector: Contract laborers in organised and un-organised sectors are paid their daily-wages in cash.
cluster 241
    Sentence 1 : The Enforcement Directorate issued several FEMA notices to forex and gold traders.
    Sentence 2 : The Enforcement Directorate raided several forex establishments making back dated entries.
cluster 242
    Sentence 1 : As of December 2016, over 4 crore in new banknotes of ?2000 were seized from four persons in Bangalore, ?33 lakh in ?2000 notes were recovered from Manish Sharma, an expelled BJP leader in West Bengal, and ?1.5 crore was seized in Goa.
    Sentence 2 : 900 notes of the new ?2000 notes were seized from a BJP leader in Tamil Nadu.
    Sentence 3 : As of 10 December, ?242 crore in new notes had been seized.
    Sentence 4 : Around ?10 crore in new notes were seized in Chennai.
    Sentence 5 : Large amounts of cash in the form of new notes were seized all over the country after the demonetisation.
    Sentence 6 : Large sum of cash in defunct notes were seized in different parts of the country.
cluster 243
    Sentence 1 : It is a measure source of funding for these terrorist groups.
    Sentence 2 : It is difficult to assume that such ready cash once stored in their hands will be put into savings for a long term.
    Sentence 3 : It is a law of nature.
    Sentence 4 : It is likely to translate into a decline in nominal GDP in the immediate term.
    Sentence 5 : It is listed for hearing on 2 December 2016.
    Sentence 6 : It is not necessary that demonetization will produce big savings in the banking system in the medium term.
cluster 244
    Sentence 1 : These sections will lose income in the absence of liquid cash.
    Sentence 2 : At the same time, it creates unavoidable income and welfare losses to the poor sections of the society who gets income based on their daily work and those who doesn’t have the digital transaction culture.
cluster 245
    Sentence 1 : This number will surely exceed.
    Sentence 2 : This cause inflation.
    Sentence 3 : This move will cause severe cash crunch for both the customers and the sellers.
cluster 246
    Sentence 1 : Debates also took place concerning the move in both houses of parliament.
    Sentence 2 : Nature of repel in the water is, it spreads in both the direction.
    Sentence 3 : On both occasions, it impacted only a miniscule segment of the society and economy.
    Sentence 4 : As the demonetisation was opposed in both houses of the parliament, it triggered organised nationwide strikes across India.
cluster 247
    Sentence 1 : The incurred loss during these days cannot be mended or attained by them.
    Sentence 2 : Although the government has made provisions to minimize the inconvenience of these people- upto next 72 hours these notes will be accepted at Government agencies.
    Sentence 3 : It means, these notes will not be accepted in legal transactions.
cluster 248
    Sentence 1 : Would it work as a means to crack down on unaccounted cash and counterfeit currency?
    Sentence 2 : In November last year, Modi announced the radical step to demonetize the currency notes in order to tackle the rampant problem of the so-called black money – billions of dollars' worth of cash in unaccounted wealth and fake currency notes.
    Sentence 3 : The demonetisation of currency notes was supposed to be an attack on black money, on counterfeit notes, and projected as part of a broader push to promote digitization and non-cash payments.
    Sentence 4 : The objectives of demonetisation, as defined by government in various phases, were to crack a whip against black money, fight counterfeit currency in circulation, formalisation of cash-dependent businesses, bringing back money lying idle in the banking system and hitting hard at the financial backbone of terrorism and naxalism.
cluster 249
    Sentence 1 : India’s demonetized currency finds its way back into the system — but can we still call it a success?
    Sentence 2 : India's demonetization policy failed to purge black money from the market, but analysts still view it as a success.
    Sentence 3 : India's demonetized currency may have found its way back into the system but analysts suggest that far from tarnishing Prime Minister Narendra Modi's image, the strategy will ultimately be viewed as a success. div > div.group > p:first-child"> "It's important to remember that the demonetization move was intended more as a political move than as an economic one," noted New York-based South Asia-focused Eurasia Group analyst Sasha Riser-Kositsky.
cluster 250
    Sentence 1 : This currency unit is the favourable denomination in daily life.
    Sentence 2 : This exemption is sometimes misused to launder money.
cluster 251
    Sentence 1 : Banks alone reported 3,61,214 suspicious transactions in 2016-17.
    Sentence 2 : As per records, digital money transfer through Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) and National Electronic Funds Transfer (NEFT) grew by 6 per cent in terms of number and by 20 per cent in value of transactions this year in comparison 2016-17.
    Sentence 3 : This shot up to 256,324 in 2016-17.
    Sentence 4 : According to CMIE’s Consumer Pyramids Household Surveys (CPHS), approximately 1.5 million jobs were lost during the final quarter of the financial year 2016-17.
    Sentence 5 : Table 1 indicates that GDP lost its growth streak of 4 years in the financial year 2016-17.
cluster 252
    Sentence 1 : The GDP growth rate further slipped to 5.7 for April-June quarter compared to 7.1 for the corresponding period last year.
    Sentence 2 : With the gross domestic product (GDP) for the April-June quarter slipping to 5.7%, the reality of the economic slowdown could not be ignored.
    Sentence 3 : The GDP growth rate for the quarter April - June 2017 dropped to 5.7%, in comparison to 7.9% for the same quarter in the previous year.
    Sentence 4 : But, it is not clear yet, if the decline in GDP growth rate was due to demonetisation or a continuation of the trend after the last quarter of 2015-16.
    Sentence 5 : First quarter gross domestic product (GDP) data released Thursday marked a three-year-low of 5.7 percent, versus 7.9 percent the year before.
    Sentence 6 : FISCAL GROWTH AND INSURGENCIES In the first fiscal quarter after demonetisation was announced, the GDP growth rate fell to 6.1 per cent compared to 7.9 for the same period the previous year.
cluster 253
    Sentence 1 : The total indirect tax collection rose to 14.2% only in the month of December according to Finance Minister Arun Jaitley.
    Sentence 2 : Finance Minister Arun Jaitley said so in a written reply to a question in the lower house of parliament, the Lok Sabha, on 16 December 2016.
    Sentence 3 : Finance Minister Arun Jaitley said on Wednesday that the confiscation of money was never the objective of the demonetisation exercise.
cluster 254
    Sentence 1 : Outside the Parliament in a rally the same day, Saugata Roy, a member of parliament from the opposition Trinamool Congress Party, commented, "People are in utter distress, especially the informal sector is totally disrupted.
    Sentence 2 : On 16 November 2016, Banerjee led a rainbow delegation comprising political parties of Trinamool Congress, Aam Aadmi Party, BJP ally Shiv Sena, Patidar Anamat Andolan Samiti (of Hardik Patel) and National Conference to Rashtrapati Bhawan to protest against the decision to withdraw the ?500 and ?1000 banknotes.
    Sentence 3 : Praful Patel, a member of the Nationalist Congress Party, stated that "the government was not even prepared to recalibrate the ATMs while announcing the move.
    Sentence 4 : Opposition parties like Indian National Congress, Bahujan Samaj Party, Trinamool Congress, DMK, JD(U), AIADMK, Nationalist Congress Party, Left, Rashtriya Janata Dal and the Samajwadi Party decided to observe ҁkrosh DiwasҠas, a protest campaign day on 28 November and launch protests in front of banks, demanding that money be returned to people.
cluster 255
    Sentence 1 : The BSE SENSEX and stock indices fell over 6 percent on the day after the announcement.
    Sentence 2 : Similarly, Desai announced the ban over the radio after which the banks were closed the following day.
    Sentence 3 : The day after the demonetisation announcement, BSE SENSEX crashed nearly 1,689 points and plunged by over 541 points.
    Sentence 4 : The government admitted as much, after having announced the policy.
cluster 256
    Sentence 1 : The new forecasts came a day before the central government released GDP numbers for the July-September quarter of fiscal 2016-17.
    Sentence 2 : Credit: PTI New Delhi: The Reserve Bank of India on Wednesday released the much-awaited numbers behind the Modi government’s demonetisation exercise.
cluster 257
    Sentence 1 : "It (Demonetization) was poorly designed, with scant attention paid to the laws of the market, and it is likely to fail.
    Sentence 2 : Due to this immobilization government is bound to circulate more currency notes in the market to keep it running.
cluster 258
    Sentence 1 : These people- the migrant labourers, the landless workers, the potters, the contract labourers, the street vendors, rickshaw pullers,female workers keep the money stashed at their homes.
cluster 259
    Sentence 1 : The railway claimed that since the Railway Board on 10 November imposed a number of restrictions to book and cancel tickets, the number of people booking 1A and 2A tickets came down.
    Sentence 2 : As soon as the demonetisation was announced, it was observed by the Indian Railways authorities that a large number of people started booking tickets particularly in classes 1A and 2A for the longest distance possible, to get rid of unaccounted cash.
cluster 260
    Sentence 1 : Big rush conditions in banks and post offices may disrupt the other regular services of Banks and Post Offices like loan disbursal, postal services etc as most of the manpower will be utilized for this note exchange activity in the upcoming weeks.
    Sentence 2 : Most of them will be afraid to go to banks and be nervous at this stage.
    Sentence 3 : Privacy may be lost: The financial situation (privacy) of families who store money in cash may be exposed to gaze of others, in the process of money exchange at banks risking their life situations For example: may lead to extortion and kidnapping in poor law and order districts.
    Sentence 4 : The above category of people will be deeply inconvenienced to go to banks to exchange their money.
    Sentence 5 : Goods will be cheaper and facilities will be in the range of poor people.
cluster 261
    Sentence 1 : A BJP MLA from Rajasthan, Bhawani Singh Rajawat, claimed in a video that wealthy businessmen were informed about the demonetisation before it occurred.
cluster 262
    Sentence 1 : The rupee fell sharply against the dollar.
    Sentence 2 : The three-month process involved expunging the Zimbabwean dollar from the country’s financial system and solidifying the U.S. dollar, the Botswana pula and the South African rand as the country’s legal tender in a bid to stabilize the economy.
    Sentence 3 : In 2015, the Zimbabwean government demonetized its dollar as a way to combat the country’s hyperinflation, which was recorded at 231,000,000%.
cluster 263
    Sentence 1 : Chief Minister of Bihar Nitish Kumar supported the move.
    Sentence 2 : Swedish Minister of Enterprise Mikael Damberg supported the move by calling it bold decision.
cluster 264
    Sentence 1 : In an interview, Chief Minister of Delhi Arvind Kejriwal lashed out at a BBC reporter who asked him to justify his 19 November claim that 55 deaths were linked to demonetisation.
    Sentence 2 : Chief Ministers of several Indian states like Mamata Banerjee,Arvind Kejriwal and Pinarayi Vijayan have criticised and led major protests against the decision in their states and in parliament.
    Sentence 3 : On 17 November 2016, in a rally against demonetisation of ?500 and ?1000 notes, led by the Chief Minister of Delhi Arvind Kejriwal and his West Bengal counterpart Mamata Banerjee at Azadpur Mandi, the biggest vegetable and fruits wholesale hub in the national capital; Kejriwal demanded the withdrawal of demonetisation in 3 days.
cluster 265
    Sentence 1 : Its a war against Corruption and love for our Country.
    Sentence 2 : Everything is fair in love and war.
cluster 266
    Sentence 1 : "Still, assuming that demonetisation is complemented by efforts to enhance tax compliance, then some success can be salvaged and lead to higher government revenue."
    Sentence 2 : The better fiscal position might also allow the government to reduce income tax rates, which would subsequently lead to higher disposable incomes with tax payers.
cluster 267
    Sentence 1 : Higher the time required to resupply Rs 500 notes, higher will be the duration of the liquidity crunch.
    Sentence 2 : Liquidity crunch (short term effect): liquidity shock means people are not able to get sufficient volume of popular denomination especially Rs 500.
    Sentence 3 : There will be a trickle up effect of the liquidity chaos to the higher income people with time.
cluster 268
    Sentence 1 : Former Senior Vice-President and Chief Economist of the World Bank, Kaushik Basu, called it a 'major mistake' and said that the 'damage' is likely to be much greater than any possible benefits.
    Sentence 2 : Here's what other economists had to say Kaushik Basu Former Vice-President and Chief Economist of the World Bank Kaushik Basu had said that demonetisation's effect would be disastrous.
    Sentence 3 : Arun Shourie Former economist at the World Bank Arun Shourie said demonetisation was the 'greatest blunder in economic policy for 70 years'.
    Sentence 4 : In a recent article in the Indian Express, Basu again said demonetisation was 'a monetary policy blunder'.
cluster 269
    Sentence 1 : This included soldiers who were on duty during the demonetisation period, people who had suffered a bereavement, and persons who had old notes received as wedding gifts before the demonetisation.
    Sentence 2 : Individuals who have an upcoming wedding are the ones who have to make alternative arrangements to make payments.
cluster 270
    Sentence 1 : As of 23 December, PMO received around 700 calls giving information about black money and it directly forwarded the information to various law enforcement agencies for further action.
    Sentence 2 : The group would in turn collate all gathered information and broadcast it to their followers at regular intervals.
cluster 271
    Sentence 1 : By the end of the intraday trading section on 15 November 2016, the BSE SENSEX index was lower by 565 points and the index was below 8100 intraday.
    Sentence 2 : As of 15 November 2016, the attributed death toll was 25. and 33 deaths as of 18 November.
cluster 272
    Sentence 1 : It is estimated that over 99 percent of Indians aged 18 and above are now enrolled in the scheme.
    Sentence 2 : It is said that the money these organisations collected over the years have now lost their value making them take such a decision.
cluster 273
    Sentence 1 : In the state of Bihar, 15 trains were blocked and stranded, while the states of West Bengal, Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh saw protest marches and rallies led by opposition parties.
    Sentence 2 : In the state of Kerala, shops and business establishments were shut, with school and colleges closed throughout the state, while movements of private vehicles were also disrupted in Northern Kerala.
cluster 274
    Sentence 1 : In November last year, there were 671.49 million digital transactions which increased to 957.50 million in December.
    Sentence 2 : Many Indians switched to alternative payment avenues – a big deal in a country of 1.2 billion with only 25.9 million credit cards and 697 million ATM cards as of July 2016.
    Sentence 3 : It also saw the number of transactions double to five million a day.
cluster 275
    Sentence 1 : The Chief Minister of West Bengal Mamata Banerjee also met the President Pranab Mukherjee to oppose the demonetisation.
    Sentence 2 : A memorandum was submitted to the President of India Pranab Mukherjee demanding rollback of the decision.
    Sentence 3 : The former President of India Pranab Mukherjee welcomed the demonetisation move by calling it bold step.
cluster 276
    Sentence 1 : Tickets above ?10,000 can be refunded by filing ticket deposit receipt only on surrendering the original ticket.
    Sentence 2 : A copy of the PAN card must be submitted for any cash transaction above ?50,000.
    Sentence 3 : The Railways Ministry and the Railway Board responded swiftly and decided that cancellation and refund of tickets of value ?10,000 and above will not be allowed by any means involving cash.
cluster 277
    Sentence 1 : The South American country believes that cross-border mafia has been buying Venezuelan bolivars and selling them for vast profits in Colombia.
cluster 278
    Sentence 1 : As The Wire has reported, Indian rupees do account for 30% of Bhutan’s foreign exchange reserves (roughly Rs 37 billion or 3,700 crore), it’s not clear whether this is held in the form of Rs 500 and Rs 1,000 notes.
    Sentence 2 : In Bhutan, the total amount of Indian rupee notes deposited by locals was Rs 1.60 billion or Rs 160 crore as per the country’s central bank.
    Sentence 3 : In Bhutan and Nepal in particular, Indian rupees are used more often than not as a valid form of currency.
cluster 279
    Sentence 1 : Hence slow down the business in coming weeks.
    Sentence 2 : The fast growing e-commerce segment which was made popular due to COD (Cash on Delivery) model will have slow business for few weeks.
cluster 280
    Sentence 1 : It says that illegal notes worth 15.28tn rupees ($242bn) had been deposited in banks up to 30 June.
    Sentence 2 : Long-Term Effects Over 3 trillion rupees, or over $44 billion in old currency, was deposited with Indian banks in just the first week after the demonetization.
cluster 281
    Sentence 1 : Tax payers who have been hiding some income can come forward to declare income and pay tax on the same.
    Sentence 2 : Someone is surely going to pay income tax on that amount.
    Sentence 3 : The government’s revenue will see an increase because of demonetization and its initial effects are already prevalent in the income tax filings post note ban.
    Sentence 4 : [Image: Tax payment] Tax payment Most of the businessmen who have been hiding some income are ready to pay advance tax as current year's income.
    Sentence 5 : According to government reports the income tax payers saw a record increase in the post demonetization era.
cluster 282
    Sentence 1 : Human brain is more creative in focusing on negative aspects at first.
    Sentence 2 : So let us discuss the negative effects first.
    Sentence 3 : In the same way, every action has both negative and positive aspects.
cluster 283
    Sentence 1 : Due to the inherent bias of the society they may choose not to go to banks themselves instead hire a middleman for this purpose who will not only charge for fees for their services and but also cheat a large amount.
    Sentence 2 : But it may not suffice in majority of situations: in case of emergency, for example, one cannot choose to go to government hospital.
cluster 284
    Sentence 1 : HSBC predicted GDP growth down by 1 per cent Global financial services major HSBC released a report after demonetisation and said: "India's economic growth is expected to fall by up to 1 percentage points over the next 12 months in the wake of demonetisation, while longer-term gains will depend on follow-up reforms."
    Sentence 2 : As the latest Economic Survey of the government of India points out: "India's demonetisation is unprecedented in international economic history, in that it combined secrecy and suddenness amidst normal economic and political conditions.
    Sentence 3 : "Using the cash elasticity of GDP, we estimate that over a year, economic growth can fall by 0.7-1.0 percentage points, with the maximum impact in the immediate two quarters, which will see a large contraction in 'effective' money supply," HSBC said in a research note.
cluster 285
    Sentence 1 : However, there are no reports if the money seized had any association with terror funding.
    Sentence 2 : In the absence of government statistics, if one relies on news reports, there seems to be some dip in immediate consumption expenditure.
cluster 286
    Sentence 1 : People turned towards digital transactions for everything from buying groceries from a road side vendor to paying utility bills during the time of demonetization.
cluster 287
    Sentence 1 : The government has been gradually making enrolment to its national electronic database 'Aadhaar' mandatory for tax returns, opening of bank accounts and any purchases above 50,000 rupees.
    Sentence 2 : The program has improved tax returns and encourage digital payments, figures suggest.
cluster 288
    Sentence 1 : Consumption ↓→ Production ↓→ Employment ↓→ Growth ↓→ Tax revenue ↓ 5.
cluster 289
    Sentence 1 : It will create uncertainty.
    Sentence 2 : It will have adverse effects," he added.
cluster 290
    Sentence 1 : "On balance, governments abroad are unlikely to replicate India's experiment given the economic fallout," he said.
    Sentence 2 : Nobody is questioning the government's intention, but you are unprepared to execute the move".
    Sentence 3 : People's suffering are unimaginable.
    Sentence 4 : The frequent change in the narrative on objectives of the demonetisation to its visible impact on the poorest of the poor made other critiques calling government's narrative as spins in view of the "pointless suffering on India's poorest."
cluster 291
    Sentence 1 : However, minor inconveniences apart, what will be the macro-economic impact?
    Sentence 2 : So, what is the immediate impact of the current demonetisation on the people and economy?
cluster 292
    Sentence 1 : Give people no other choice 11:45 AM ET Fri, 11 Aug 2017 04:08 Meanwhile cash-dependent small businesses and poorer citizens – those Modi had claimed to be helping – have been badly hurt by note-shortages this year.
    Sentence 2 : Give people no other choice] How to build a cashless society?
cluster 293
    Sentence 1 : The biggest positive certainly seems to be the eradication of some stocked and staked up money, perhaps earned through illegitimate means or tax evasion.
    Sentence 2 : It was an experience which might create fear in the minds of the people who indulge in illegal activities like tax evasion or money laundering of any kind.
    Sentence 3 : Much like India, Pakistan is on a mission to fight tax evasion and the stashing of illegal wealth.
cluster 294
    Sentence 1 : Transactions in the Indian agriculture sector are heavily dependent on cash and were adversely affected by the demonetisation of ?500 and ?1,000 banknotes.
    Sentence 2 : In terms of volume, the report stated that 24% (around 22.03 billion) of the total 9026.6 crore (90.26 billion) banknotes in circulation were ?500 and ?1,000 banknotes.
    Sentence 3 : How have, in value terms the Rs 500 and Rs 2,000 banknotes fared?
    Sentence 4 : In the announcement, Modi declared circulation of all ?500 and ?1,000 banknotes of the Mahatma Gandhi Series as invalid effective from the midnight of the same day, and announced the issuance of new ?500 and banknotes of the Mahatma Gandhi New Series in exchange for the old notes.
    Sentence 5 : By the second week after demonetisation of ?500 and ?1,000 banknotes, cigarette sales across India witnessed a fall of 30ִ0%, while E-commerce companies saw up to a 30% decline in cash on delivery (COD) orders.
    Sentence 6 : The chairman of the State Bank of India had also openly spoken in April 2016 about the possibility of demonetisation of ?500 and ?1000 notes.
    Sentence 7 : In the announcement, Modi declared that use of all ?500 and ?1000 banknotes of the Mahatma Gandhi Series would be invalid past midnight, and announced the issuance of new ?500 and banknotes of the Mahatma Gandhi New Series in exchange for the old banknotes.
    Sentence 8 : In its annual report of March 2016, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) stated that total bank notes in circulation valued ?16.42 trillion (US$260 billion) of which nearly 86% (around ?14.18 trillion (US$220 billion)) derived from ?500 and ?1,000 banknotes.
    Sentence 9 : 500 and ?
    Sentence 10 : On 28 October 2016 the total banknotes in circulation in India were valued at ?17.77 trillion (US$280 billion); what proportion of this derived from ?500 and ?1,000 banknotes was unknown.
    Sentence 11 : 2016 Indian banknote demonetisation Early political career Premiership On 8 November 2016, the Government of India announced the demonetisation of all ?500 and ?1000 banknotes of the Mahatma Gandhi Series.
    Sentence 12 : The preparations for printing new ?500 and ?2000 bank notes began in early May 2016.
    Sentence 13 : Patel also stated that the decision had been made about six months ago, and the printing of new banknotes of denomination ?500 and ?2,000 had already started.
cluster 295
    Sentence 1 : On November 8, 2016, the Modi government kicked off a massive demonetisation exercise in a move that was aimed at curbing black money, fake currency and corruption.
    Sentence 2 : By and large, international response was positive which saw the move as a bold crackdown on corruption.International Monetary Fund (IMF) issued a statement supporting Modi's efforts to fight corruption by the demonetisation policy.
    Sentence 3 : The attempt to wipe out black money and corruption might be rigid, however was it really a well-planned move?
    Sentence 4 : PM’s move on banning the respective notes certainly may be the ray of hope to sweep out corruption and a boon to every tax-payer.
cluster 296
    Sentence 1 : In terms of value of digital transactions, November 2016 saw digital payments worth Rs 94 lakh crore.
    Sentence 2 : But, by July it had come down to 862.38 million digital payments.
    Sentence 3 : Several e-commerce companies hailed the demonetisation decision as an impetus to an increase in digital payments, hoping that it would lead to a decline in COD returns which could cut down their costs.
    Sentence 4 : After peaking in December 2016, digital transactions declined from January 2017 onwards, thus thwarting the objective of increasing digital payments through demonetisation.
    Sentence 5 : "There are also long-term benefits from demonetization in terms of increasing income tax payments going forward and encouraging the use of digital payments over cash, a means of encouraging better tax compliance among businesses," Riser-Kositsky explained.
cluster 297
    Sentence 1 : Another argument for demonetisation was to break the backbone of terrorism and naxalism.
    Sentence 2 : They said that forged cash was used to fund terrorist activities, and that the demonetisation was meant to counter this.
    Sentence 3 : Given the scale of demonetisation, this was anticipated.
    Sentence 4 : Another stated aim of demonetisation was to detect and eliminate counterfeit notes.
cluster 298
    Sentence 1 : And that reminds us of an incident dating back to early 70s, when there were rumours of withdrawing Rs 100 note from circulation, and immediately hoards of people were seen rushing to banks to exchange their Rs 10 and Rs 20 currencies.
    Sentence 2 : RBI increased the withdrawal limit from Savings Bank account to Rs 50,000 from the earlier Rs 24,000 on 20 February 2017 and then on 13 March 2017, it removed all withdrawal limits from Savings Bank Accounts.
    Sentence 3 : 2500 and from bank its Rs 10000 only.
    Sentence 4 : However, the lower denomination –Rs 10, Rs 20, Rs 50, Rs 100 and coins –will be valid.
cluster 299
    Sentence 1 : Indian-American economist Jagdish Bhagwati praised the demonetisation.
    Sentence 2 : Former Prime Minister of Finland and Vice-President of European Commission Jyrki Katainen welcomed the demonetisation move stressing that bringing transparency will strengthen Indian economy.BBC's South Asia Correspondent Justin Rowlatt in his article praised the move for its secrecy and success and elaborated on reason behind demonetisation.Tim Worstall termed the demonetisation as welcome macroeconomic effect in his article in Forbes magazine.
cluster 300
    Sentence 1 : He further announced that new notes of Rs 500 and Rs 2,000 would introduce shortly.
    Sentence 2 : There are also new Rs 500 notes in circulation, which are very thin and have great security features.
    Sentence 3 : The government decided to introduce a new 500 rupee note and also introduce a higher denomination banknote of 2,000 rupees.
    Sentence 4 : Rs 500 and Rs 1000 notes were introduce in 1934 and after four years in 1938, Rs 10,000 notes were introduce.
    Sentence 5 : [Image: New notes now in circulation] New notes now in circulation We now have new notes in circulation with denomination of Rs 2,000 for the very first time.
cluster 301
    Sentence 1 : The semi-urban and rural sections will take more time than urban areas to cope up with the change, however the shortage of smaller denominator notes will create more chaos.
    Sentence 2 : A 2016 Reserve Bank of India (RBI) report on branch authorization policy classified 93% of rural centres in the country as unbanked, with the population dependent on roving banking correspondents and on distant urban or semi-urban branches.
    Sentence 3 : Access to the internet is equally patchy, with only 3% of households in underdeveloped rural areas reporting access to internet in a 2016 consumer economy survey.
    Sentence 4 : The hardest-hit were those in rural areas, where access to banking and the internet are quite low.
cluster 302
    Sentence 1 : Income Tax officials raided multiple branches of Axis Bank and found bank officials involved in money laundering acts, exchanging old notes for gold.
    Sentence 2 : Income Tax departments raided various illegal tax-evasive businesses in Delhi, Mumbai, Chandigarh, Ludhiana and other cities that traded with demonetised currency.
cluster 303
    Sentence 1 : Zero Counterfeit Notes: In India, the circulation of fake Indian currency notes (FICN) has been on the rise, according to the Reserve Bank of India’s (RBI) annual reports.
    Sentence 2 : In August, the Reserve Bank of India declared in its annual report, that of demonetised currencies worth Rs 15.4 lakh crore, the high value notes worth Rs 15.3 lakh crore were deposited in the banks.
    Sentence 3 : On page 195 of this year's Reserve Bank of India (RBI) annual report lies the answer to the question many Indians have been asking for close to 10 months.
    Sentence 4 : Earlier this week, the annual report from the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), the country's central bank, found that a total of 15.28 trillion rupees ($239 billion) worth of cancelled high-value notes were deposited or exchanged for new money in the 10 months since the strategy was implemented – just one percent shy of the number in circulation before the plans came in.
    Sentence 5 : 99% of demonetised notes returned, says RBI report The Reserve Bank of India’s annual report has finally revealed that as much as ₹15.28 lakh crore of the high-value currency that was demonetised in November returned to the central bank.
cluster 304
    Sentence 1 : RBI’s printing costs also went up because of the move.
    Sentence 2 : By turning farm markets into buyers’ markets, demonetisation may have also contributed to the decline in prices of pulses.
    Sentence 3 : Empty ATM’s: Same as bank branches, queues on ATM’s will also have to face same fate.
cluster 305
    Sentence 1 : The CMD of Punjab National Bank said that panic after demonetisation started fading on 19 November 2016.
    Sentence 2 : The company stated that the debit card transactions rose by 108% and credit card transactions by 60% on 9 November 2016.
cluster 306
    Sentence 1 : Limits placed vide the circulars cited above on cash withdrawals from Current accounts/ Cash credit accounts/ Overdraft accounts stand withdrawn with immediate effect.
cluster 307
    Sentence 1 : Credit rating agency India Ratings & Research maintained its GDP growth forecast for India at 7.8% for FY17, albeit with a downward bias.
    Sentence 2 : India's GDP growth for the quarter Jan-Mar '17 was 6.1% as against a forecast of 7.1% by economists.
    Sentence 3 : According to Societe Generale, India's quarterly GDP growth rates would drop below 7% for an entire year at a stretch for the first time since June 2011.
    Sentence 4 : The GDP growth for the entire fiscal year was 7.1%, a reduction from the 8% of the previous year.
cluster 308
    Sentence 1 : Alternative Funds Soon after the announcement, people rushed to buy gold, a demand that drove prices up, in some cases even to a 60% premium, prompting the tax authorities to conduct surveys, according to the Business Standard newspaper.
    Sentence 2 : Noted economist and journalist, T. N. Ninan wrote in the Business Standard that demonetisation 'looks like a bad idea, badly executed on the basis of some half-baked notions'.Deepak Parekh (Chairman of HDFC) had initially appreciated the decision to ban the ?
cluster 309
    Sentence 1 : The reduction in demand that arose in turn led to a crash in the prices of crops.
    Sentence 2 : Impact on Agriculture: The months of November and December are the season for sowing of Rabi crops (in most of India) and Samba crops in Tamil Nadu.
cluster 310
    Sentence 1 : It launched a campaign for crowdsourcing locations of ATMs in their vicinity that were live and working.
    Sentence 2 : Ҍive ATM AlertҠwas a hashtag campaign started by a group of youngsters from a Facebook community called '7PM Status'.
    Sentence 3 : The public were asked to post the location and details of ATMs that were live and dispensing cash, including a hashtag #LiveATMAlert or by tagging the group in their post in Facebook or Twitter.
cluster 311
    Sentence 1 : Smaller deposits, ranging Rs 2 lakh to Rs 80 lakh, were made in about 1.09 crore bank accounts after demonetisation was announced.
    Sentence 2 : These were high value deposits of over Rs 80 lakh each.
    Sentence 3 : According to one estimate the total deposits made after demonetisation accounted for more than Rs 10 lakh or simply about two-thirds of the total demonetised money.
cluster 312
    Sentence 1 : The highest denomination note ever printed by the Reserve Bank of India was the 10,000 rupee note in 1938 and again in 1954.
    Sentence 2 : The cost of printing a Rs 1,000 counterfeit note, for instance, is Rs 39 (the RBI spends Rs 29 to print a Rs 1,000 note), but it is sold at Rs 350-400, according to the report.
    Sentence 3 : After the note ban, there was a spike in donations in the form of the demonetised notes in temples.
    Sentence 4 : Rein on Terrorism: The ISI has been making a profit of 30-40% on the face value of each counterfeit Indian note produced in Pakistan, according to the report.
cluster 313
    Sentence 1 : In March 2017, the government stated that they received no official report on deaths connected to demonetisation.
    Sentence 2 : Prominent businessmen stated after the announcement of demonetisation that they had received prior warning of the move, allowing them to convert their money into smaller denominations.
cluster 314
    Sentence 1 : Individuals and entities with huge sums of black money gotten from parallel cash systems were forced to take their large-denomination notes to a bank, which was by law required to acquire tax information on them.
    Sentence 2 : More than 30 politicians belonging to the BJP were arrested and investigated for having unaccounted money in the new 2000 rupee denomination.
    Sentence 3 : Image copyrightAFP Image caption New 2,000 rupee denomination notes were introduced Over and above this, the government's policy caused a huge cash shortage, with people having to spend many days standing in ATM lines trying to withdraw their own money.
cluster 315
    Sentence 1 : Alibaba (NYSE:BABA)-backed Paytm saw a sevenfold increase in overall traffic and a 10-fold jump in money added to Paytm accounts.
    Sentence 2 : Paytm rival MobiKwik also saw its app downloads quadruple and a 20-fold increase in money added to the wallets, MobiKwik Founder & CEO Bipin Preet Singh, told CNBC-TV18 on November 13.
    Sentence 3 : Ola Money, the payment portal for popular transportation app Ola Cabs, reported a 1500% jump in money added to the accounts in less than four hours.
cluster 316
    Sentence 1 : This drop in GDP growth was attributed to demonetisation.
    Sentence 2 : This decrease was due to demonetisation.
    Sentence 3 : This figure was fact-checked by The Wire at the time.
    Sentence 4 : This drop in GDP was attributed to demonetisation by economists.
    Sentence 5 : This was the lowest growth in GDP since 2014.
    Sentence 6 : This was backed up by the government press release accompanying the decision.
cluster 317
    Sentence 1 : A Public Interest Litigation (PIL) was filed in Madras High Court by M Seeni Ahamed, General Secretary of the Indian National League, to scrap the decision.
    Sentence 2 : The High Court dismissed the PIL stating that it could not interfere in monetary policies of the government.
cluster 318
    Sentence 1 : The government announced that seized notes would be returned to circulation to address the shortage of cash.
    Sentence 2 : 1000 notes that were demonetised returned to the banking system, a figure far larger than the government had expected at the time of banning the notes.
    Sentence 3 : In any case, nobody seems to be unduly worried now that the entire demonetization episode and the time frame to exchange the old notes now stands completed.
cluster 319
    Sentence 1 : Cooperative banking system has been prevented from handling cash".
    Sentence 2 : The growth in detected counterfeit notes after demonetisation has not been unusually large, shows RBI data, even as counterfeits of the freshly issued notes have already emerged in the system.
cluster 320
    Sentence 1 : Impact Of Demonetisation On The Indian Economy On Gross Domestic Product (GDP): The Indian economy is a cash-driven economy and demonetisation has largely affected its growth.
    Sentence 2 : Quantitative Analysis Of The Impact Of Demonetisation On The Indian Economy As per the data published in hand book of statistics on Indian Economy by RBI, GDP at Market price fell approximately by 1 percent as compared to previous financial year.
    Sentence 3 : New project announcements declined sharply in the wake of demonetisation, a Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy (CMIE) analysis showed, hurting the capex cycle.
    Sentence 4 : 1.5 Million Jobs Lost, GDP At A Low: The State Of The Indian Economy After Demonetisation Demonetisation is going to be a landmark in the history of the Indian economy.
cluster 321
    Sentence 1 : Prime Minister of India Narendra Modi announced the demonetisation in an unscheduled live televised address at 20:00 Indian Standard Time (IST) on 8 November.
    Sentence 2 : Narendra Modi announced the currency ban is an address that was broadcasted across all news channels.
    Sentence 3 : On 8 November 2016, Modi announced the demonetisation in an unscheduled live national televised address at 20:15 Indian Standard Time.
cluster 322
    Sentence 1 : There is a public poll on discontinuing Rs.
    Sentence 2 : It is a strike on the legal tender of India, on the currency.
    Sentence 3 : This is a strike not on black money.
    Sentence 4 : Because, there is a limit on printing currency notes.
    Sentence 5 : It is a strike on cash transactions."
    Sentence 6 : “This is the first time a currency ban is happening in a country on such a large scale.
cluster 323
    Sentence 1 : The department also seized cash and jewellery worth over ?5.49 billion (US$86 million) out of which the new currency seized (majority of them ?2000 notes) is valued at about ?1.05 billion (US$16 million).
    Sentence 2 : As of 28 December, official sources said that the Income Tax department detected over ?41.72 billion (US$650 million) of un-disclosed income and seized new notes worth ?1.05 billion (US$16 million) as part of its country-wide operations.
    Sentence 3 : Authorities of Sri Jalakanteswarar temple at Vellore discovered cash worth ?4.4 million (US$69,000) from the temple hundi in the form of defunct notes.
    Sentence 4 : In Chhattisgarh liquid cash worth of ?4.4 million (US$69,000) was seized.
cluster 324
    Sentence 1 : The volume of banknotes, however, increased by 11.1%, mainly due to higher infusion of banknotes of lower denomination in circulation following the demonetisation,” the RBI notes.
    Sentence 2 : The cash shortage was still ongoing in the month of April 2017, five months after the demonetisation.
    Sentence 3 : The exchange of banknotes was stopped completely on 25 November: Modi had previously stated that the volume of exchange would be increased after 24 November.
    Sentence 4 : Three months after the withdrawal of banknotes, a quarter of the ATMs were still short of cash.
cluster 325
    Sentence 1 : We might also assume that people stash the cash nuder the bed and it stays there for years.
cluster 326
    Sentence 1 : And whatever they will do it will convert their black money into white, at least for once.
    Sentence 2 : So, in this case, instead of converting black money into white, a person has accidentally converted his white money into black.
    Sentence 3 : So, whatever the reason is, if someone has withdrawn a decent amount from his account then it will create a huge problem for him to prove himself innocent.
cluster 327
    Sentence 1 : While the recent ban had shaken the whole country.
cluster 328
    Sentence 1 : It is reported that insurgents have stashed more than ?70 billion in the Bastar region.
    Sentence 2 : The tax collection by local bodies have surged over 260% and more than 15,000 crore more after 14 days of demonetisation.
    Sentence 3 : But more than anything else, demonetization has a big propaganda effect.
cluster 329
    Sentence 1 : We've the two types of money, M0 and M4 (to use the English terms) base money and broad.
    Sentence 2 : According to analysts, there are two broad explanations.
cluster 330
    Sentence 1 : World leaders, economists, and international organisations watched the bold experiment with a mix of wonder and worry.
cluster 331
    Sentence 1 : Several critics raised questions about the success of demonetisation saying that coming back of almost entire invalidated currency stock into the banking system meant, the government could not find any black with the note ban.
    Sentence 2 : Nepal, Bhutan factors Currently, there is Rs 16,000 crore, in the form of demonetised Rs 500 and Rs 1,000 notes, that haven’t made their way back into the Indian banking system.
    Sentence 3 : Or two, the proportion of Rs 500 and Rs 1,000 notes that was black money has been successfully laundered back into the system.
cluster 332
    Sentence 1 : But this figure may rise significantly by the end of FY18.
    Sentence 2 : But this may also have led to large-scale job losses.
cluster 333
    Sentence 1 : Black money hoarders do not hold the money in cash according to several finance experts and when this point was highlighted time and again, other important effects of demonetization were publicized by the government, like the role of demonetization on curbing terrorism.
    Sentence 2 : Demonetization and Terror Funding The second reason to support demonetization was its role in curbing terrorism by increasing the obstacles in terror funding.
    Sentence 3 : Demonetization and Black Money One of the most important points that pushed people to support demonetization was its associating with bringing an end to the black money problem in India.
cluster 334
    Sentence 1 : The amount deposited can be used for the betterment of the country.
    Sentence 2 : Legal tender refers to money which can be legally used to make payments of debts or other obligations.
cluster 335
    Sentence 1 : There has been a lot of opposition regarding the implementation of this policy.
    Sentence 2 : There have long been concerns about terror financing through forged notes for example.
cluster 336
    Sentence 1 : [Image: An Indian bank employee counts old 500 and 1000 rupee notes in Guwahati, the capital city of the north-eastern state of Assam on December 30, 2016.] Biju Boro AFP Getty Images An Indian bank employee counts old 500 and 1000 rupee notes in Guwahati, the capital city of the north-eastern state of Assam on December 30, 2016.
    Sentence 2 : The ordinance also provided for the exchange of the bank notes after 30 December for non-resident citizens and others on a case by case basis.
    Sentence 3 : The Specified Bank Notes (Cessation of Liabilities) Ordinance, 2016 was issued by on 28 December 2016 ceasing the liability of the government for the banned bank notes, and also imposing fines on people found carrying out transactions with them after 8 November 2016; or holding more than ten of them after 30 December 2016.
cluster 337
    Sentence 1 : RBI has increased the Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR)—the share of total deposits that commercial banks have to hold as reserves either in cash or as deposits with the central bank—to 100 percent on additional deposits.
    Sentence 2 : A cursory look at the Reserve bank of India’s data on money supply as on 11th of November shows that M3 (i.e., Broad Money) has shrunk by Rs 38,300 crore on a fortnightly basis and currency available with the public has shrunk by Rs 1.75 lakh crore, while demand deposits and time-deposits have increased.
    Sentence 3 : Intense scrutiny The central bank was under intense scrutiny since January — after the window for depositing the withdrawn ₹500 and ₹1,000 banknotes had closed — for details on the extent of currency that was returned to the RBI in the wake of the government’s sudden decision to withdraw high-value banknotes as a means to combating counterfeiting, black money and the financing of terrorist activities.
    Sentence 4 : ALSO READ Shame on RBI for recommending demonetisation: Chidambaram The latest RBI data showed that 98.96% of the withdrawn currency — at the time of demonetisation the value of old ₹500 and ₹1,000 notes in circulation was ₹15.44 lakh crore — was deposited with the banks.
cluster 338
    Sentence 1 : Demonetisation gravely impacted their revenue collection and threatened their existence to an extent.
    Sentence 2 : Due to Demonetisation such acts might get restricted to an extent and parties will have to formulate new strategies.
cluster 339
    Sentence 1 : 9.1 million New taxpayers were added to the slab which was an 80% rise over the typical yearly rise.
cluster 340
    Sentence 1 : ACTION AGAINST BLACK MONEY The government has projected demonetisation is a big ongoing success story in fight against black money.
    Sentence 2 : Chinese state media Global Times praised the move and termed it as "fierce fight against black money and corruption."
cluster 341
    Sentence 1 : According to government press releases, the official WPI for ‘All Commodities’ (Base: 2004-05=100) for the month of December, 2016 declined by 0.2 percent to 182.8 (provisional) from 183.1 (provisional) for the previous month.
    Sentence 2 : The index started rising during the month of January and rose by 1.0 percent to 184.6 (provisional) from 182.8 (provisional) for the previous month.
    Sentence 3 : (pic: local press co.) The controversy of introducing Rs.2000 note coined several doubts on the government as to what could the strategy be?
    Sentence 4 : (pic: change.org) Standing behind long queues in the bank each day to withdraw nominal amount which is insufficient however, lately the weekly withdrawal was increased to soothe the civilians from unrest for the time being.
    Sentence 5 : (pic: local press co.) (pic: hiimpact) A lot of corruption came into notice which can be called as the demonetising effect.
cluster 342
    Sentence 1 : So far, Modi’s move has left millions scrambling for cash, hitting consumption and thereby threatening GDP growth in India.
    Sentence 2 : 96,000 left by their mother and petitioned the Prime Minister for relief.
cluster 343
    Sentence 1 : But media had reported in October 2016 about the introduction of ?2,000 denomination well before the official announcement by RBI.
    Sentence 2 : But this was known by many before the RBI reports as well.
cluster 344
    Sentence 1 : As The Wire has reported in the past, a certain amount of these banknotes are in India’s neighbouring countries.
    Sentence 2 : Major transit points include India’s neighboring countries Nepal and Bangladesh.
cluster 345
    Sentence 1 : Sporadic violence was reported in New Delhi, but there were no reports of any grievous injury, people attacked bank premises and ATMs, and a ration shop was looted in Madhya Pradesh after the shop owner refused to accept ?500 banknotes.
    Sentence 2 : If the owner could not provide proof of making any tax payments on the cash, a penalty of 200% of the owed amount was imposed.
cluster 346
    Sentence 1 : During this change, most of the working class people had to stand in queues to withdraw a basic minimum amount of cash from banks or ATMs, where many small businesses run on liquid cash.
    Sentence 2 : (pic: The New Indian Express) Aiming at combating corruption or black money, short-term problems and chaos spread among the working class; especially those that deal with cash on a daily basis.
    Sentence 3 : The scarcity of cash due to demonetisation led to chaos, and most people holding old banknotes faced difficulties in exchanging them due to endless queues outside banks and ATMs across India, which became a daily routine for millions of people waiting to deposit or exchange the ?500 and ?1000 banknotes since 9 November.
    Sentence 4 : It means, on banks have to deal with average of 300 people daily.
cluster 347
    Sentence 1 : Allow withdrawal from ATM is upto Rs.
    Sentence 2 : But its upto us to decide what is more important.
cluster 348
    Sentence 1 : The government’s aim was to root out counterfeit currency, fight tax evasion, curb inflation, eliminate black money and terror-funding, and to promote a cashless economy.
    Sentence 2 : The demonetisation was initially seen by some sources as a significant step towards making India a cashless economy.
    Sentence 3 : The government’s goal (and rationale for the abrupt announcement) was to combat India's thriving underground economy on several fronts: eradicate counterfeit currency, fight tax evasion (only 1% of the population pays taxes), eliminate black money gotten from money laundering and terrorist-financing activities, and to promote a cashless economy.
    Sentence 4 : Demonetization was initiated with a wide array of motives like stripping the Indian economy of its black money, push people to pay taxes for the unaccounted pile of cash, curb terrorism, promote the digital India movement and make India a cashless economy.
    Sentence 5 : Demonetization began as a way to curb the black money from our economy was later addressed as a means of making India cashless and giving digital India a boost.
    Sentence 6 : Demonetization and Digital India Pushing India towards becoming a cashless economy was another reason that demonetization was publicized for.
cluster 349
    Sentence 1 : The Governor I.G. Patel believed that the ban was implemented simply to immobilize the funds of the opposition party.
    Sentence 2 : After Modi's announcement, the Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, Urjit Patel, and Economic Affairs Secretary, Shaktikanta Das, stated that while the supply of notes of all denominations had increased by 40 percent between 2011 and 2016, the ?500 and ?1,000 banknotes increased by 76 percent and 109 percent, respectively, owing to forgery.
    Sentence 3 : This statement has led to much debate, because the Reserve Bank governor six months before the announcement was Raghuram Rajan, while the new banknotes have the signature of the newly appointed governor, Urjit Patel.
cluster 350
    Sentence 1 : The senator who put forward the motion, Osman Saifulla Khan, clarified that the government wasn’t in any way following India’s ideology, saying that he was the last person to be impressed by Modi, according to the Dawn newspaper.
    Sentence 2 : India’s history with demonetisation: From 1946 to 2016 The whole country was taken aback when Prime Minister Narendra Modi on November 8 announced that the currencies in the denominations of Rs 500 and Rs 1,000 will be invalid post midnight.
    Sentence 3 : The government’s efforts to revamp the currency system provided people with a boost to use the cash that was lying around and invest it in a more productive way.
    Sentence 4 : Three countries in three continents: After Modi’s India, demonetisation is spreading around the world Six weeks ago, when prime minister Narendra Modi announced his government’s decision to demonetise Rs500 and Rs1,000 notes, it wasn’t just Indians who were taken aback.
    Sentence 5 : Nonetheless, it now appears Modi’s decision was just the first of a handful of such year-end demonetisation exercises around the world.
cluster 351
    Sentence 1 : Usually skeptical to changes is typical among Indians.
    Sentence 2 : Demonetization proved that Indians can strive and adapt to any changes and made people financially aware about the different spending options.
cluster 352
    Sentence 1 : The real costs of this unprecedented event are only just starting to come out.
    Sentence 2 : The poll just has one question and takes only a couple of seconds to complete.
cluster 353
    Sentence 1 : When it comes to Nepal, the situation is a little more complex.
    Sentence 2 : Consumption will be hit: When liquidity shortage strikes, it is consumption that is going to be adversely affected first.
cluster 354
    Sentence 1 : [Image: Reduction in illegal activity] Reduction in illegal activity Banning high-value currency will halt illegal activity as the cash provided for such activities has no value now.
    Sentence 2 : Banning high-value currency will impact people who will have no option, but, to declare income and pay tax on the same or destroy the cash somehow.
    Sentence 3 : Before that, India had experienced demonetisation of high-value currency in January, 1946.
    Sentence 4 : The proportion of high-value notes (Rs500 and above)—often viewed as conduits of black money—has also been rising as new notes have entered the system.
    Sentence 5 : At the end of fiscal year 2017 (FY17), the proportion of high-value notes stood at 74%, considerably lower than that in FY16.
cluster 355
    Sentence 1 : This may be correlated with the availability of cash with people which led to increased spending.
    Sentence 2 : No Identity proof may may be available which are required for exchanges above Rs 4000.
cluster 356
    Sentence 1 : International airports also facilitated an exchange of notes for foreign tourists and out-bound travelers, amounting to a total value of ?5,000 per person.
    Sentence 2 : Interest in Bitcoin also spiked: Sandeep Geonka, co-founder of Zebpay, told Investopedia that his bitcoin exchange was now adding about 50,000 new users per month.
cluster 357
    Sentence 1 : The more native and conservative people also opened up towards the era of plastic cash and made several Indians tech friendly.
    Sentence 2 : The MSME sector has been recovering from the drastic changes and its impact on the revenue, but demonetization forced the MSME sector to be friendlier and more accommodating towards the digital arenas and made them more accommodating towards change.
cluster 358
    Sentence 1 : It can boost the GDP by increasing the availability of funds for lending and also by reducing transaction costs if the economy moves to digital modes of payments.
    Sentence 2 : It is expected that it can improve the Indian economy in the long run by increasing tax compliance, financial inclusion, consequently improving the state of the economy.
cluster 359
    Sentence 1 : It can distribute the extra potatoes to those who require the most.
    Sentence 2 : Now, replace potatoes by money and imagine the outcomes.
    Sentence 3 : In simple terms, say, government gives you 100 potatoes to distribute in the market.
    Sentence 4 : Now imagine, somehow government raids on you and liberates all the stored stock of potatoes.
cluster 360
    Sentence 1 : The effects of change are emergent from the system itself, not something that we can determine beforehand.
    Sentence 2 : All of which rather brings us to Hayek's point, that we can't plan an economy.
    Sentence 3 : And we've not that scoobie about which way it will go.
    Sentence 4 : It's something we've just got to wait and see about.
    Sentence 5 : And we really don't know, we've not a clue, not a scoobie.
    Sentence 6 : More than that, the only thing we've got which can calculate an economy is the economy itself.
    Sentence 7 : Which is something of a problem because we can surmise it either way.
cluster 361
    Sentence 1 : It didn’t have much effect on the people and affected only the privilege few.
    Sentence 2 : Differences in the ban: Unlike Modi, Desai didn’t have the backing of the RBI Governor.
    Sentence 3 : (pic: BGR) Assuming the attempt to clear out corruption wasn’t a planned process, the brunt that the common people have been facing since that night was not justified either.
    Sentence 4 : There wouldn’t have been shortage of cash in banks and ATMs (the new 2000 and 500 notes) and people who belong to working class would not have been the victims of the crisis if the idea to demonetise would have been more planned.
cluster 362
    Sentence 1 : On Political Parties: Many Political Parties use large amounts of undeclared cash to campaign for elections and meet other requirements.
    Sentence 2 : Many people found small amounts of currency stashed away inside quilts, pillows, cupboards, lockers, behind old photographs and wall hangings, in some cases by family members who had died.
cluster 363
    Sentence 1 : However, the value of such notes is a minuscule Rs 41 crore,” Ghosh states.
    Sentence 2 : However, the government has given higher withdrawal limit in such cases.
cluster 364
    Sentence 1 : However, these varied currencies remained convertible into Euros at fixed exchange rates for a while to assure a smooth transition.
cluster 365
    Sentence 1 : It was demonetised first in 1946 and then in 1978.
    Sentence 2 : In 1978, the Janata Party coalition government demonetised banknotes of 1000, 5000 and 10,000 rupees, again in the hopes of curbing counterfeit money and black money.
    Sentence 3 : Similarities in 1978 and 2016 ban: The note ban by Morarji Desai also aimed to drive away black money out of circulation in the economy.
    Sentence 4 : [Image: rs-5000_1978] Image Source The second: That came in 1978; the then Prime Minister of India Morarji Desai announced the currency ban taking Rs 1000, Rs 5000 and Rs 10,000 out of circulation.
    Sentence 5 : [Image: rs-1000_1938] Image Source The first currency ban: In 1946, the currency note of Rs 1,000 and Rs 10,000 were removed from circulation.
    Sentence 6 : Demonetisation has been implemented twice -1946 and 1978 – in the past.
cluster 366
    Sentence 1 : It may be encashed by the savers at the appropriate time.
    Sentence 2 : It will be converted into active liquidity by the savers when full-fledged new currency supply take place.
cluster 367
    Sentence 1 : The withdrawal of silver from the economy resulted in a contraction of the money supply, which subsequently led to a five-year economic depression throughout the country.
    Sentence 2 : Simultaneously, rumors of a gold ban started to float, which led to agencies ramping up the volume of gold imports – to around 100 metric tons during November, the highest since 2015, as reported by Reuters.
    Sentence 3 : The year 2014-2015 saw a steep rise, with 594,446 FICN detected, up from 488,273 in the year 2013-14.
cluster 368
    Sentence 1 : 1000 notes, but later said that the move had derailed the economy, and expressed skepticism about its outcome.
    Sentence 2 : Nobel laureate Kailash Satyarthi and others working to fight human trafficking said that the note ban had led to a huge fall in sex trafficking, but that the trade had already begun rebounding by the following month.
    Sentence 3 : However, 2 months later he expressed his disappointment on Rs 2000 notes being pushed into human trafficking in absence of other concrete steps.
cluster 369
    Sentence 1 : Small businesses and households struggled to find cash and reports of daily wage workers not receiving their dues surfaced.
    Sentence 2 : The daily wage earners, other labourers, small traders etc. who reside out of the formal economy uses cash frequently.
    Sentence 3 : Poor people, daily wage earners, they're all facing difficulty."
    Sentence 4 : Many poor daily wage workers were left with no job and income as owners were unable to pay their daily wage.
cluster 370
    Sentence 1 : In the short run, there have been problems related to liquidity crunch, unemployment, loss of growth momentum, and a temporary halt to major economic activities.
    Sentence 2 : Mostly the daily wagers, cash related businesses and services were under a huge loss and had succumbed to the currency crunch.
cluster 371
    Sentence 1 : We have seen some inspiring pictures where vegetable seller is accepting money via PayTm.
    Sentence 2 : Incidents of terrorism have seen spurt in Kashmir Valley where the casualties on both sides have gone up sharply.
xxxxxxxxxxxxxx 13 xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxxx done xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
BUILD SUCCESSFUL (total time: 1 minute 31 seconds)
