What will be the positive and negative effects of demonization of ₹500/1000 notes on Indian economy? Narendra Modi government, in what many are calling a “ Surgical Strike on Black Money”, has made the Rupees 500 and 1000 currency notes (currently in circulation) as invalid or null after midnight of 8th November. Positives of this bold and unprecedented move are aplenty but let me try to play the Devil’s Advocate just to see the flip-side of the story (and also to answer the question): Inconvenience to Poor people: Most of the rural and urban poor in India are un-banked i.e. they don’t have bank accounts. (Precisely this the reason the Jan Dhan Scheme to open Bank accounts was launched, now we can see the other purpose of the scheme). These people- the migrant labourers, the landless workers, the potters, the contract labourers, the street vendors, rickshaw pullers,female workers keep the money stashed at their homes. Their life savings are in cash amount. They will face an uphill challenge to get the money converted into currency notes of valid denominations. They are not connected to banks or any formal channel of banking. No Identity proof may may be available which are required for exchanges above Rs 4000. It is even possible that there is no bank or post office nearby. Most of them will be afraid to go to banks and be nervous at this stage. They will have to spare a day’s work to go for re-encashment, hence loss of work. They may even face harassment at the hands of Bank officials to get the money exchanged. They may even have to pay bribes. 2. The Disadvantaged lot: Old people, disabled, sick, transgenders and prostitutes will be especially impacted. The above category of people will be deeply inconvenienced to go to banks to exchange their money. The transgenders and prostitutes keep all of their money in cash with themselves. Due to the inherent bias of the society they may choose not to go to banks themselves instead hire a middleman for this purpose who will not only charge for fees for their services and but also cheat a large amount. 3. Emergency Situations: People who need money for some urgent work like to see a doctor, pay hospital charges, medical emergency, travelling etc will be in a highly difficult situation as no one will accept their money (even if they have it) if in denominations of Rs 500 or 1000 notes. The ATMs and banks closed for two days, hence they will have no other resort (except of net-banking). Although the government has made provisions to minimize the inconvenience of these people- upto next 72 hours these notes will be accepted at Government agencies. But it may not suffice in majority of situations: in case of emergency, for example, one cannot choose to go to government hospital. 4. Impact on Households: It is an Indian thing in villages and small towns for housewives to keep their saved cash hidden away from their husbands and other family members. Invalidation of Rs 500 and 100o notes will jeopardize this scheme. Households with liquor problems will provide the husbands to seize control of the hidden cash. Also, general day to day purchase may be impacted due to lack of cash in hand. 5. Impact on Agriculture: The months of November and December are the season for sowing of Rabi crops (in most of India) and Samba crops in Tamil Nadu. This season requires a lot of cash in hand for purchasing seeds, pesticides, fertilizers, hiring labourers etc. All these activities will be severely hampered due to want of required cash. 6. The informal sector: Contract laborers in organised and un-organised sectors are paid their daily-wages in cash. Now the contractors can delay the wage payment for few days till things settle down. These laborers will have to face hardships for comings days since they live a life on hand to mouth earnings. 7. Gold: Now since the black money stored in cash gone in one shot, the corrupt may start saving their black money in some other easy investment to avoid any loss in future and the easiest option might be keeping them in gold and silver so that they can be en-cashed with ease in future. This may lead to increase in gold imports in long run. 8. Indian Economy: Most of the business in India has cash transaction with less than 2% business transactions taking place electronically. This move will cause severe cash crunch for both the customers and the sellers. Hence slow down the business in coming weeks. The small artisans and street vendors will be most impacted. The fast growing e-commerce segment which was made popular due to COD (Cash on Delivery) model will have slow business for few weeks. 9. Foreign travelers: Tourists in India will have to queue in banks to get the notes changed. Also, Indians who are on foreign visits may not be able to come back to India immediately, hence locking their money. 10 . Privacy may be lost: The financial situation (privacy) of families who store money in cash may be exposed to gaze of others, in the process of money exchange at banks risking their life situations For example: may lead to extortion and kidnapping in poor law and order districts. 11. Panic and awareness: There will be a panic like situation for many cash holders due to lack of awareness. Big rush conditions in banks and post offices may disrupt the other regular services of Banks and Post Offices like loan disbursal, postal services etc as most of the manpower will be utilized for this note exchange activity in the upcoming weeks. There can be many cases of cheating as well due to lack of knowledge and awareness of people. The above points are all short -term disadvantages, clearly indicating that the surprise and sudden nullification of Rs 500 and 100 notes is a master stoke by the NDA government which will cut deep into the black money and corruption market. Terrorist funding will be deeply pruned so will be the issue of FICN (Fake Indian Currency Note). This will encourage electronic transactions in future, thereby increasing the number of formal transaction increasing government revenue by way of taxes and curb fraudulent financial transactions. Advantages are a too many to cover here.