Effects Of Demonetisation On India's GDP - Difficult To Calculate, We Don't Even Know The Sign The demonetisation effort being led by PM Modi in India is that idea that Rs 500 and Rs 1,000 notes should be declared no longer legal tender, to be replaced by other notes of different designs and in one case, denominations. The aim is to wash the stock of "black money" out of the economy and get it into the licit, banked and taxable, part of the economy. The microeconomic effects here seem, as I've said before, to be beneficial. There have long been concerns about terror financing through forged notes for example. There's quite obviously substantial tax revenue going uncollected. And perhaps the biggest effect is, as I've said, that large portions of the population feel that the basic system is unfair. They're locked out of that easier world where matters are settled in large amounts of cash, where tax is not paid and where favours are bought. However, we should also think about the macroeconomic effects here. And that's difficult--because we're not even sure what the sign of the effect will be, positive or negative, let alone the size of it. It's actually possible for this to run either way: Ambit Capital, a respected Mumbai-based equity research firm, has officially estimated that the demonetisation-driven cash crunch will result in GDP growth crashing to 0.5% in the second half of financial year 2016-17. This means the GDP growth for six months, from October 2016 to March 2017, could decelerate to 0.5%, down from 6.4% in the previous six months. Further, Ambit Capital estimates that during the October to December quarter that we are currently in, the GDP growth may contract, thus showing negative growth. However, Ambit is hopeful that a strong formalisation of the informal economy will ensue through 2017 until 2019 and this disruption could also crimp GDP growth in 2017-18 to 5.8 % from their earlier estimate of 7.3%. That's perhaps the case for the prosecution. The disruption to the economy will be such that there will be, possibly, not just no growth in this last quarter of the year but actually a shrinking of the economy. "The demonetisation-driven cash crunch that is playing out in India will paralyse economic activity in the short term. We expect a strong 'formalisation effect' to play out as nearly half of the non-tax paying businesses in the informal sector (40% share in GDP) will become unviable and cede market share to their organised sector counterparts. We expect this dynamic to crimp GDP growth in India in FY18 as well and hence we have cut our FY18 GDP growth estimate to 5.8 per cent YoY (from 7.3 per cent)," Ambit economists Ritika Mankar Mukherjee, Sumit Shekhar and Prashant Mittal said in a note. It's a possibility, certainly. But it's not a certainty. For economies are complex things with many moving parts. I've already pointed out that the inflow of money into bank accounts will reduce interest rates and that has a stimulatory effect upon economic growth. And we're reducing the budget deficit as some of that black money gets taxed, which will reduce inflation--again beneficial. But there's yet one more thing we need to consider and that's the effect upon the money supply. Which is surprisingly difficult to work out: In mathematical terms, velocity of money is the ratio between GDP and money in circulation—which RBI estimates to be around 1.3 for India. However by ‘money’, it does not mean the cash that we exchange in day-to-day transactions (part of something called high powered money or M0). Instead it is broad money (also known as M3) where you also include bank deposits, post office savings and other bits and pieces of financial savings. M3 and M0 in India are linked by a factor of 6—so roughly speaking, R1 of cash in circulation, ultimately adds up to R6 worth of broad money. So, if velocity of money calculated using broad money is 1.3, then it equates to six-times the amount, or 7.8 with respect to cash in circulation. So we now have a measure of how quickly transactional cash changes hands in the legitimate Indian economy. It's worth reading that analysis in full as it is very thought provoking. And the thought it provokes in me is that we just don't know. We don't even know, again, what the sign on the effect will be, positive or negative, let alone the size of it. We've the two types of money, M0 and M4 (to use the English terms) base money and broad. One is just cash and central bank reserves, the other is that multiplied by the velocity of money and the actions of the banking system. We're taking some portion of base money out of the system--whatever portion of black money simply vanishes as a result of demonetisation. A decrease in the money supply is contractionary upon the economy. However, look at our problem here. We've got a good idea of what V, velocity, is in the formal economy. And we don't know what it is in the informal or black economy. And we really don't know, we've not a clue, not a scoobie. Which is something of a problem because we can surmise it either way. We could assume that those who commit their nefarities with black money quickly move that on so as to be able to gain more. V in the informal economy would be high therefore. We might also assume that people stash the cash nuder the bed and it stays there for years. V would be very low therefore. In fact, we will, obviously, assume that some people do the one, some the other, and many do either dependent upon their whims. Which means that we've simply got no idea at all, not that scoobie, about what the overall effect is. If V is very much lower in the informal economy then even with the loss of some of that base money and the move of the rest into the formal banking system then the broad money supply will expand as a result. That's stimulatory. If V is higher in that informal economy than in the formal then the demonetisation move significantly reduces the broad money supply and that's contractionary. And we've not that scoobie about which way it will go. All of which rather brings us to Hayek's point, that we can't plan an economy. The major reason being that it's too complicated and we can never gain enough information to be able to do so. More than that, the only thing we've got which can calculate an economy is the economy itself. The effects of change are emergent from the system itself, not something that we can determine beforehand. Thus we just don't know what the macroeconomic effect of demonetisation is going to be. It's something we've just got to wait and see about.